[Senate Hearing 114-85]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]






                                                         S. Hrg. 114-85

IMPACTS OF EPA'S PROPOSED OZONE STANDARD ON MANUFACTURING AND UTILITIES

=======================================================================

                             FIELD HEARING

                               before the

                              COMMITTEE ON
                      ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
                          UNITED STATES SENATE

                    ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

                             FIRST SESSION

                               __________

                    SEPTEMBER 1, 2015--COLUMBUS, NE

                               __________

  Printed for the use of the Committee on Environment and Public Works



[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]



       Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys

                               __________







                         U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
 96-922 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2015
_________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
      Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area
(202)512-1800
     Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001




               COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS

                    ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS
                             FIRST SESSION

                  JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma, Chairman
DAVID VITTER, Louisiana              BARBARA BOXER, California
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming               THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho                    BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas               SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
JEFF SESSIONS, Alabama               JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi            KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND, New York
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska                CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota            EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska

                 Ryan Jackson, Majority Staff Director
               Bettina Poirier, Democratic Staff Director



                            C O N T E N T S

                              ----------
                                                                   Page

                           SEPTEMBER 1, 2015
                           OPENING STATEMENT

Fischer, Hon. Deb, U.S. Senator from the State of Nebraska.......     1

                               WITNESSES

Baker, Russ, Manager, Environmental and Regulatory Affairs
  Division, Omaha Public Power District..........................    12
    Prepared statement...........................................    15

Kinter, John, Environmental Manager, Nucor Steel Nebraska........    24
    Prepared statement...........................................    26

Corbin, David E., Ph.D., Professor Emeritus, Health Education and
  Public Health, University of Nebraska--Omaha; Fellow of the
  American School Health Association; Affiliate Governing Council
  Representative to the American Public Health Association from
  the Public Health Association of Nebraska......................    30
    Prepared statement...........................................    32
    Response to an additional question from Senator Boxer........    39

Zimmerer, Mark, President and CEO, Norfolk Area Chamber of
  Commerce.......................................................    54
    Prepared statement...........................................    56


IMPACTS OF EPA'S PROPOSED OZONE STANDARD ON MANUFACTURING AND UTILITIES

                              ----------


                       TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 1, 2015

                                       U.S. Senate,
                 Committee on Environment and Public Works,
                                                      Columbus, NE.
    The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m. on
September 1, 2015, at the Fine Arts Center, Central Community
College, 4500 63rd Street, Columbus, Nebraska, Hon. Deb
Fischer, U.S. Senator from the State of Nebraska, presiding.

            OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DEB FISCHER,
            U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF NEBRASKA

    Senator Fischer. The hearing will come to order.
    Good morning. I am very pleased to convene the Senate
Environment and Public Works Committee for a field hearing
which is titled Impacts of the Environmental Protection
Agency's Proposed Ozone Standard on Manufacturing and
Utilities.
    It's wonderful to host this hearing right here in Platte
County, Nebraska, where the average unemployment rate is 3.24
percent and a thriving manufacturing industry serves as the
foundation for many surrounding local communities.
    I would also like to extend a special thank you to Central
Community College for providing today's accommodations.
    Today we welcome a group of Nebraska stakeholders to share
their perspectives on the Environmental Protection Agency's
proposed rule to reduce the allowable concentration of ground-
level ozone from 75 parts per billion to between 65 and 70
parts per billion.
    Today's hearing allows us to explore this issue in depth
and determine the impacts this proposal will have on Nebraska's
families, businesses and utilities.
    The EPA's proposal has been called the most expensive
regulation of all time. Regardless of one's view on this
proposal, we can all agree the American people deserve to know
the real cost of this regulation.
    Additionally, it is unclear whether the new standard
provides any real health benefits. There are also serious flaws
with the EPA's methods and modeling for the proposal.
    For example, the EPA did not consider personal exposure to
ozone, which is the concentration people actually breathe in
when setting the standard. Instead, the agency used outdoor
monitoring data that significantly overestimates the risk.
    Furthermore, the EPA's own assessment indicates that
lowering ozone concentrations would actually result in more
deaths in some instances. This alarming result either shows a
stricter standard would not achieve its objective or that there
are serious problems with the EPA's methodology.
    While questions remain about the scientific evidence used
to justify the EPA's proposal, there is no question that this
new standard would be economically devastating. A stricter
ozone standard would put 57 Nebraska counties in nonattainment.
This includes rural counties that have less than one person per
square mile.
    This rule would also expose urban areas like Omaha, which
currently complies with Federal clean air standards, to harsh
regulations that will stifle new and existing industry growth,
as well as impede transportation infrastructure improvements.
    Moreover, the EPA's proposal would require power plants and
industrial facilities across Nebraska to install expensive
ozone control equipment, limit production or buy offsets, which
would stifle economic growth.
    This means that our citizens, Nebraska is the only 100
percent public power State in the country, and this means that
our citizens own the electricity.
    The additional compliance costs imposed by this proposed
rule would be passed down to small businesses, it would be
passed down to families and it would result in a $370 drop in
average household consumption per year.
    Nebraskans value clean air. Our businesses and utilities
take seriously their role in protecting air quality. However,
many communities are still struggling to achieve the standards
that were set in 2008. Stricter standards would put an
additional burden on communities across our State. In some
cases, due to background ozone levels, attainment would be
virtually impossible to attain.
    I have serious concerns about imposing additional rules,
regulations and permitting requirements on our jobs, our
Nation's job creators, our electricity providers and our
families. We should not be in the business of creating
unnecessary regulations; instead, we need to explore policy
options that promote growth.
    I am entering into the record comments submitted by the
Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality, the Omaha Public
Power District and the Norfolk Area Chamber of Commerce. Each
set of comments states that the current ozone standard of 75
parts per billion should be retained.
    Additionally, I am also submitting to the record testimony
from Dr. Bryan Shaw, he is the commissioner of the Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality who provided testimony for
the committee hearing on this topic last December. He states
that EPA's process of setting ozone standards has not
scientifically proven that further lowering of the ozone
standard will fail to provide any measurable increase in human
health protection.
    Today's panel represents diverse perspectives on the effect
of the proposed rule to lower the ground-level ozone standard.
I am eager to hear further details from our panelists on the
challenges that each industry and business will face if and
when the EPA finalizes this proposed rule.
    Today's hearing will begin with a witness who can speak to
the importance of providing affordable and reliable electricity
to our Nebraska ratepayers. Russ Baker is the manager for the
Omaha Public Power District's Environmental and Regulatory
Affairs Division. Mr. Baker plans, organizes and directs OPPD's
environmental compliance programs and related regulatory
matters across the district's nuclear, coal, natural gas and
ever increasing renewable generation fleet.
    Mr. Baker has been with OPPD since 2000 and has worked in
environmental affairs for nearly a decade. In addition to his
tenure at OPPD, Mr. Baker has also served on the Board of
WasteCap Nebraska, a non-profit organization dedicated to
helping businesses and communities in Nebraska reduce and
eliminate waste in Nebraska.
    Russ, I am very eager to hear how this proposed rule will
impact our public power utilities, please begin your testimony.
    [The referenced comments follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]



STATEMENT OF RUSS BAKER, MANAGER, ENVIRONMENTAL AND REGULATORY
         AFFAIRS DIVISION, OMAHA PUBLIC POWER DISTRICT

    Mr. Baker. Thank you, Senator Fischer.
    Good morning. Thank you for inviting me to testify. My name
is Russ Baker, and I am the manager of Environmental and
Regulatory Affairs at Omaha Public Power District.
    I am here testifying today on behalf of the Nebraska Power
Association. I would like to take this opportunity to commend
you for your hard work in the support of our association
members throughout the State of Nebraska. We stand ready to
continue to work with you to maintain and improve Nebraskans
access to affordable, reliable and environmentally sensitive
electric power.
    The Nebraska Power Association is comprised of the 167
utilities that produce and deliver electricity to Nebraskans.
We are a voluntary organization representing all segments of
Nebraska's power industry, municipalities, public power
districts, public power and irrigation districts and
cooperatives which are engaged in generation transmission and
distribution of electricity within our State.
    Nebraska is the only State in the U.S. where every home and
business is served by a publicly controlled utility. Publicly
owned utilities exist to serve customers. There are no
stockholders and thus no profit motive. Public power electric
prices do not include a profit. Nebraskans utilities focus
exclusively on keeping electric rates low and customer service
high.
    Today I will discuss the Nebraska Power Association's view
of the EPA's proposal to update the air quality standards for
ground-level ozone.
    On November 25th of 2014, the EPA proposed to strengthen
the National Ambient Air Quality Standards or ground-level
ozone. EPA is proposing to update both the primary ozone
standard to protect public health and the secondary standard to
protect the public welfare. Both standards would be an 8-hour
standard set within a range of 65 to 70 parts per billion.
    Ozone is a pollutant that has respiratory health effects in
humans and also impairs plant growth and damages crops. It is
produced when emissions nitrogen oxides and volatile organic
compounds react in the presence of sunlight.
    Controls on nitrogen oxides and volatile organic compound
emissions from vehicles, power plants and other sources have
enabled many U.S. counties to meet the 75 parts per billion
standard, but the number of counties in nonattainment status,
currently at 227, would jump to 358 or 558 if the standard is
revised to 75 parts per billion or 65 parts per billion
respectively.
    In the State of Nebraska, should the standard be set less
than 68 parts per billion, the counties of Knox and Douglas
would likely be classified as nonattainment, impacting 8,605
and 535,556 people respectively based on 2013 estimates.
    The potential impact of these designations can be found in
a study by NERA Economic Consulting that was commissioned by
the National Association of Manufacturers. The study estimated
that an ozone standard of 65 parts per billion could cost the
economy $140 billion per year, eliminate 1.4 million job
equivalents annually and cost the average U.S. household up to
$830 per year in the form of lost consumption.
    We are hopeful that the EPA also considered the adverse
effect a lower ozone standard may have on low income households
and whether the possible benefits of lower ambient ozone levels
offset the possible harmful effects of unemployment or having
less disposable income to purchase necessary goods and services
such as groceries, medicine, obtaining proper medical care or
the ability to afford electricity which is needed for comfort,
security, cooking and overall well-being.
    While the Nebraska Power Association is supportive of
ambient air quality standards that are protective of public
health, we are also concerned with the ramifications of the
proposed more stringent ozone NAAQS.
    The impacts of a lower ozone standard in the potential
designation of Nebraska's largest population center, the city
of Omaha, as nonattainment for ozone, will have significant
economic impacts on these areas and the State as a whole.
    With significant economic and job loss impacts of a tight
ozone standard, we feel the EPA reconsider the ultimate benefit
of finalizing an ozone standard lower than the current 75 parts
per billion standard.
    EPA's own analysis indicates that significant reductions in
ozone levels will be achieved absent a new ozone air quality
standard by implementation of a number of other EPA regulations
including the Cross-State Air Pollution Rule and Regional Haze
Regulations. As such, the substantial costs associated with
large sections of the country being designated nonattainment
for ozone will needlessly be levied on those communities and
States, while EPA already has regulations in place that will
act to reduce ozone concentrations to the levels anticipated in
the proposed rule.
    It seems a rational approach would be to maintain the ozone
standard at the current level, and allow other EPA regulations
to act to lower ambient ozone levels. EPA could then revisit
the issue during the next 5-year air quality standard review to
assess the progress made in lowering ozone levels and determine
if setting a lower ambient air quality standard is required as
further incentive to reduce ozone levels.
    Alternatively, if EPA determines that a newer lower ozone
standard is required, the Nebraska Power Association suggests
that EPA set the standard at 70 parts per billion and write the
final rule such that implementation of the standard has the
least economic impact on the country as possible.
    EPA has already conducted modeling and an assessment of
future ozone levels under current and proposed regulations and
determined that ozone levels will drop significantly. Because
EPA analysis shows that a majority of the country will achieve
compliance with a lower ozone standard without any area-
specific actions, at the discretion of the State involved, the
final rule should allow for EPA analysis to substitute for the
traditional requirements associated with the nonattainment
designation.
    There should be no need for a detailed analysis to form a
plan to achieve compliance, no need for area-specific actions
by existing sources of emissions and no need for the area to be
subject to the stringent nonattainment new source review
permitting requirements that may act to stunt economic
development.
    This approach will allow for achievement of the ambient
ozone goals while maintaining and minimizing the costs.
    In summary, the Nebraska Power Association believes that
the most prudent approach to attaining lower ambient ozone
levels, without imposing a high cost on the country's economy,
is to leave the current ozone standard in place and allow the
impacts of other regulations EPA is implementing to act to
lower ambient ozone concentrations, as EPA has determined they
will.
    Alternatively, if it is determined that a lower standard is
required, the Nebraska Power Association believes that a
standard set at 70 parts per billion is appropriate and
implementation of the standard should allow States to use EPA's
analysis and modeling as a remedy, or part of the remedy, for
any area that is showing nonattainment with the new standard.
    Again, thank you for the opportunity to appear today and I
would be happy to answer any questions you might have for me.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Baker follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


    Senator Fischer. Thank you Mr. Baker.
    Next I would like to welcome John Kinter. He is the
environmental manager of Nucor Steel which is located in
Norfolk. Mr. Kinter has over 18 years of experience in
environmental affairs, a graduate of the University of
Nebraska's Environmental Studies Program. He has also served in
the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality as an
environmental specialist.
    We are very fortunate to have someone testify today who has
as much experience with implications of environmental
regulations as you do, sir. So please begin your testimony.

 STATEMENT OF JOHN KINTER, ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGER, NUCOR STEEL
                            NEBRASKA

    Mr. Kinter. Thank you, Senator.
    Senator Fischer, on behalf of our more than 1,000 Nebraska
teammates and our over 23,000 teammates across the country,
thank you for the invitation to testify today on the
Environmental Protections Agency's proposed standard for
ground-level ozone.
    I am John Kinter, environmental manager of Nucor Steel
Nebraska in Norfolk. Nucor Corporation is the largest steel
producer in North America as well as the largest recycling.
    In order to put into context the impacts of the
administration's proposed ozone standard, I would like to take
a minute to describe briefly the current state of the global
steel industry.
    For the past 18 months, steel imports have been surging
into the United States at record levels. Our market is
currently the strongest for steel demand which is attracting
these imports. However, many of these steel imports are only
competitive because they are illegally dumped or subsidized.
    All too often, foreign governments provide their steel
companies with substantial financial support, in violation of
international trade laws.
    As a result, U.S. steel makers are not benefiting from a
stringer U.S. economy. In fact, thousands of steel jobs have
been lost this year because of the impact unfairly traded
imports are having on our market.
    The effect of these job losses ripple beyond our industry
since every one steel job supports an additional seven jobs in
America.
    In this difficult global steel market, any regulatory
proposal that threatens to greatly increase our cost is of
concern. Margins are already tight. By some estimates, the
proposed ozone standard could be one of the costliest
regulations ever.
    Nucor operates 24 steel mills across the country. Today
only one of those steel mills is in an area designated as being
in nonattainment for ozone. Should the EPA decide to set a new
standard at the lower end of the proposed range, Nucor will
potentially have 19 steel mills in nonattainment areas,
including our mill here in Nebraska. Going from 1 to 19 mills
in nonattainment areas would be a drastic and costly change.
    Lowering the ozone standard to 65 or even 70 parts per
billion, would make it difficult to expand or build new
industrial facilities. Companies wanting to build or expand
will be faced with an expensive permitting process and be
forced to install costly emission reduction controls. The EPA
has acknowledged that existing technology will not be
sufficient to achieve the level of reduction it is proposing.
This puts companies in a difficult spot. We are being asked to
make significant emission reductions, but the technology to
achieve then does not exist.
    Increased costs for emission control technology would not
be the only hit to our bottom line. Nucor will also face
increased energy prices as energy producers pass their
compliance costs on to their customers.
    Energy represents 20 percent or more of the cost of making
a ton of steel. As I've already mentioned, steel companies
compete against foreign steelmakers that receive subsidies from
their governments, including energy subsidies.
    To remain competitive, the steel industry needs global,
reliable energy. The proposed ozone standard will make an
already difficult competitive environment for American
steelmakers that much worse.
    The proposed rule will also hurt economic development for
communities in Nebraska and around the country. Lowering the
ozone standard will reduce investment, especially for the
manufacturing sector which provides high-wage jobs. The timing
couldn't be worse. Low energy prices make the U.S. an
attractive place for manufacturing, but reducing the ozone
standard will make building new facilities much less likely.
Nothing dries up business investment faster than uncertainty.
    Nucor believes the 2008 ozone standard of 75 parts per
billion should be fully implemented and the environmental and
health benefits measured before considering lowering the
standard again.
    EPA data shows the ozone precursor emissions have been cut
in half during the last 10 years. Full implementation of the
2008 standard will result in additional remission reductions.
Based on these facts, we believe it is unnecessary to lower the
ozone standard at this time.
    The U.S. is the one economic bright spot globally right
now, let's not jeopardize this position by moving ahead hastily
to implement a new ozone standard before we have even fully
implemented the previous one. Thank you.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Kinter follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]



    Senator Fischer. Thank you.
    Next we have Dr. David Corbin, a professor emeritus of the
Health Education and Public Health at the University of
Nebraska in Omaha.
    He is a fellow of the American School Health Association,
as well as the representative of the Affiliate Governing
Counsel to the American Public Health Association from the
Public Health Association of Nebraska.
    I would note that as is customary for Senate Environment
and Public Works Committee hearings, we worked in a bipartisan
matter to select witnesses, and I welcome Dr. Corbin to begin
your testimony when you are ready. Nice to have you here.

STATEMENT OF DAVID E. CORBIN, PH.D., PROFESSOR EMERITUS, HEALTH
  EDUCATION AND PUBLIC HEALTH, UNIVERSITY OF NEBRASKA--OMAHA;
  FELLOW OF THE AMERICAN SCHOOL HEALTH ASSOCIATION; AFFILIATE
GOVERNING COUNCIL REPRESENTATIVE TO THE AMERICAN PUBLIC HEALTH
   ASSOCIATION FROM THE PUBLIC HEALTH ASSOCIATION OF NEBRASKA

    Mr. Corbin. Thank you for the opportunity to present before
you today. As you heard, I'm Dr. David Corbin from University
of Nebraska in Omaha, and you already heard my other
credentials.
    My testimony will be both professional and personal since I
also suffer from asthma. Since the main focus of this hearing
is the impact of ozone standards on manufacturing industry,
electric utilities and other stakeholders, I would first like
to draw attention to another public health issue that I worked
on to protect the public's health.
    The issue was to the creation of smokeless environments
including bars and restaurants. Many business owners testified
about how they would go out of business if the law passed. The
law did pass, business flourished and health improved. In
short, what is good for health is good for business.
    The Wellness Councils of America founded right here in
Nebraska is one of the Nation's largest and most respected
organizations for promoting healthy work sites.
    They believe that the workplace is an ideal setting to
address employee health and well-being. They also believe, as
does any health-related organization, that prevention is better
and less expensive than treatment.
    A reduced ground-level ozone standard is a known method of
prevention. The American Public Health Association and the
American Lung Association are two of the countless health-
related organizations that support a health protective standard
for ozone.
    A stronger ozone standard will prevent deaths, hospital
admissions, asthma attacks and days missed at work and school.
It is society's duty to protect the most vulnerable, of which I
am included by virtue of being an older adult, having asthma
and being a person who desires to exercise outside.
    Other vulnerable groups are children, people with lung and
cardiovascular conditions and even healthy adults who work in
the outdoors.
    Imagine the dilemma of a public health profession who has
spent much of his or her career promoting exercise to improve
health, who then has to advise people not to exercise outside
because of high ozone levels.
    Businesses, including those testifying here today, rightly
promote safety and health. What business would want to have
their own workers or their workers' families exposed to a known
health hazard, especially since it can save the company money
and health care costs and missed workdays. And since we already
have effective methods of reducing ozone levels.
    Nebraska's blessed with an abundant wind and solar
resources that when exploited can help to keep ozone levels low
and produce energy without adding more carbon dioxide to the
atmosphere.
    The world just experienced the hottest July in recorded
history. High temperatures exacerbate ozone levels. The world
successfully addressed our other ozone problem, the hole in the
protective upper atmosphere via a worldwide effort that
resulted in the banning of chlorofluorocarbons. Ground-level
ozone is the opposite of protective, but it is a problem that
can be solved.
    The Lancet, one of the most prestigious medical journals in
the world, published a report on June 23, 2015, in which they
said, ``Ground-level ozone and particulate air pollutants are
elements that will be most affected by climate change. Climate
change is predicted to elevate ground-level ozone levels over
large areas of the U.S. and Europe.''
    If the threat to human health isn't enough, the very heart
of our Nebraska agricultural economy is threatened by ground-
level ozone. A study published in the journal of Atmospheric
Environment said this: ``Our results suggest that ozone
pollution poses a growing threat to global food security even
under an optimistic scenario of future ozone precursor
emissions. Further efforts to reduce surface ozone
concentration thus provide an excellent opportunity to increase
global grain yields.''
    This information alone should be a call for strict
standards on ground-level ozone. My own physician here in
Nebraska, Dr. Linda Ford, who would have liked to be here to
testify today but couldn't, she treats me for asthma and she's
been the president of American Lung Association. She summed up
the ozone situation succinctly: ``Every little bit we decrease
the levels of ozone, we'll save on health care costs. So where
do you want to spend your money? If you want to take care of
your people and prevent disease, you spend it on decreasing
ozone.''
    I and millions of other Americas would love to breathe
easier and spend less money on my asthma medication. Thank you.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Corbin follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]



    Senator Fischer. Thank you very much, Dr. Corbin.
    Next we have Mr. Mark Zimmerer, president and CEO of the
Norfolk Area Chamber of Commerce, a life-long Nebraskan Mr.
Zimmerer has also served as the director of the Northeast
Nebraska Child Advocacy Center, Faith Regional Health Services,
an advocacy group dedicated to working to achieve child-focused
approaches and child abuse and negligent cases.
    Mark, you are to be commended for your community service
and working with abused and at-risk children.
    Prior to being selected as the Chamber's new president, Mr.
Zimmerer served on the organization's board of directors. I am
looking forward to hearing from you and I know you will offer
great insight on how the proposed ozone rule will impact the
small business community in Norfolk, Nebraska. When you are
ready, please begin.

  STATEMENT OF MARK ZIMMERER, PRESIDENT AND CEO, NORFOLK AREA
                      CHAMBER OF COMMERCE

    Mr. Zimmerer. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you, Senator
Fischer, for having me testify today.
    I'm Mark Zimmerer, president and CEO of the Norfolk Area
Chamber of Commerce. Representing our 650 businesses, in which
Nucor is one, and we are deeply concerned about the harmful
impact of the EPA's recent proposed rule to make ozone standard
more stringent could have on a struggling economy. Ozone
standards at the levels considered and EPA's proposal could
push virtually the entire country into nonattainment.
    Where local communities face burdens in attracting and
keeping commercial and industrial activity, not only vital to
creating jobs, but also to providing tax revenue that supports
important local services like public safety and education.
    We all value clean air. The managers and employees of the
companies we represent, as well as their families, we all
breathe the same air. We are proud that the emissions of ozone-
forming emissions have been cut in half since 1980, leading to
a 33 percent drop in ozone concentrations.
    Moreover, EPA just updated these ozone standards just 6
years ago. This country can expect to see even greater
reductions in ground-level ozone as States make up lost ground
in putting the current standards into effect.
    Indeed, States are currently committing substantial
resources, both in time and money, toward achieving emission
reductions under those current ozone standards. Yet despite
over three decades of cleaner air and before States can catch
up with the EPA's delays on implementing existing ozone
standards, EPA is now proposing a new stringent standard
between 70 and 65 parts per billion.
    In some areas, this proposed range is out or near the level
of ground--background ozone that is naturally occurring or
internationally transported pushing even remote counties far
from industrial activities into nonattainment.
    According to EPA's own data, even the pristine Grand Canyon
and Yellowstone National Park would fail proposed ozone
standards.
    If finalized, EPA's proposed stringent ozone standards
could limit business expansion in nearly every populated region
in the States and impair the ability of U.S. companies to
create new jobs.
    The Clean Air Act carries even stiffer consequences for
nonattainment areas, directly impacting economic vitality of
local communities and making it difficult to attract and
develop business.
    Increased costs associated with restrictive and expensive
permit requirements would likely deter companies from sitting
new facilities in nonattainment areas.
    We cannot stand by and allow our economy to be collateral
damage as a result of more unnecessary and unfunded
regulations. Nonattainment designations will have profound
impact on infrastructure development vital to the business
community.
    Beginning 1 year from the date of nonattainment
designation, federally supported highway and transit projects
cannot proceed in nonattainment areas unless the State can
demonstrate that the project will cause no increased ozone
emissions. These restrictions do not disappear when an area
finally comes into attainment. Instead, former nonattainment
areas face a legacy of EPA regulatory oversight.
    Against these economic consequences, scientific
uncertainties regarding the benefits of more stringent ozone
standards have increased.
    Indeed, stringent ozone standards may have severe
unintended consequences for public health. Indeed, stringent
ozone standards may cause the increase of cost of goods and
services, such as energy and decreasing disposal incomes.
Regulation can inadvertently harm social economic status of
individuals and thereby contribute to poor health and premature
death.
    The Norfolk Area Chamber of Commerce believes these
scientific uncertainties should better explored in order to
best allocate resources in a manner that strengthens both the
economy and environment.
    The need for balanced government policies and reasonable
flexibilities has never been greater, and no single regulation
threatens to disrupt this balance more than the EPA's ozone
rule.
    The air is getting cleaner and current ozone standards need
an opportunity to work. Therefore, in light of the economic
hardship, reduction in funding for crucial civic services and
uncertain benefits all related to the stringent ozone standard
that EPA now is considering, the Norfolk Area Chamber of
Commerce calls on the EPA to retain the existing ozone standard
of 75 parts per billion. Standard for ground-level ozone. Let
us meet these requirements before once again moving the target.
Thank you.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Zimmerer follows:]

 [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


    Senator Fischer. Thank you very much and I thank you all
for your thoughtful testimony.
    It's clear that you and the groups you represent have
strong appreciation for the importance of a healthy environment
and strong driving communities here in Nebraska. But there are
clearly some major issues with the proposed rule that would
impact both rural and metropolitan areas of the State.
    I would like to open up this first question to all the
members of the panel, if you would like to weigh in on it.
    In your view, how do we as Nebraskans ensure that our air
quality is at the highest standard and how will this proposed
rule impact efforts to safeguard our air quality? Do you think
the costly top down Federal standard from Washington, DC,
basically, is it a help or is it going to be a hindrance? Why
don't we start with you, Mr. Baker.
    Mr. Baker. Thank you, Senator Fischer, for that question.
    I think, you know, from my perspective and I think you've
heard, for sure Mr. Kinter and Mr. Zimmerer, speak about it,
background levels of ozone are about half of what that standard
is and it's influenced by a lot of different conditions that
are beyond our control.
    For instance, when there is burning that done in Kansas in
the Flint Hills, we get particulates in ozone that cross over
into the State of Nebraska and cause us air quality problems.
    Global transport from Asia and from States that are west of
Nebraska also factor into it as well.
    The Federal Government in the way I think that they're
looking at this ozone standard in ratcheting down basically to
a background of, will not allow any States that are going to be
impacted to have any sort of economic development
opportunities.
    I think as you heard Mr. Kinter talking, and I would
wholeheartedly agree from a utility perspective, we're getting
to the point right now where there is not a technology that's
available that you can deploy to reduce the kinds of emissions
that EPA is calling for. So it really is--it is a hindrance,
and it's almost like we're at the law of diminishing returns on
lowering a standard down a level that's almost immeasurable.
    The health impacts of it, I would--I would argue to some of
Dr. Corbin's points that he's making are hard to measure. We
don't have absolute data that shows a direct cause and impact,
it's extrapolated across a whole population of a country and
not looked at specifically on a county or city basis.
    The lowering of that standard I think is a hindrance to our
Nation and to our communities as a whole. That would be my
perspective.
    Senator Fischer. If I can follow up with you on that, you
mentioned fires in the Flint Hills of Kansas and then you
talked about States west of us and even overseas. We're seeing
millions of acres burn west of us, and we've all seen the
effect on the red sky in the morning and at night that we see
all across the State. I've traveled all across the State this
month, I can tell you that every part of Nebraska has been
affected by those fires to the west of us.
    Is there anything in the proposed rules that would take
that into account that would allow for flexibility for a
natural occurring event that we as a State have absolutely no
control over when they're measuring the parts per billion on
this, or is it just--is it just strict and we would be in
nonattainment and then how do we get out of nonattainment?
    Mr. Baker. Thank you, Senator, for that question.
    There are provisions that they speak about in the
regulations where a State would be able to, more or less make a
plea to EPA to say we've got certain conditions that are
existing that are beyond the control that you can--that you
should take into account.
    But the fact of the matter is, there are no real definitive
boundaries on what they can do, it's subjective and up to the
interpretation of EPA and the agreement of EPA on whatever--
whatever evidence or whatever sort of information that you
bring forward from a State. That's the way that I understand
that.
    It's not as--it's not as definitive as what is stated to
the regulation, so there are provisions to do that.
    I would say most, or at least from a utility perspective,
you probably view that as maybe being a little skeptical of
how--of how they would interpret that and maybe apply that
given the plethora of other regulations that we're facing in
the utility industry for sure, I'm sure some of the other, if
not all the other industries, in the State of Nebraska.
    Senator Fischer. OK, thank you.
    Mr. Kinter.
    Mr. Kinter. Yes, thank you. Mr. Baker hit on a lot of--a
lot of good points that I would just echo for Nucor. And no one
would disagree that we want to live in a prosperous and healthy
community and have clean air. What Nucor is concerned about is
the uncertainty.
    We're talking about specifically ground-level ozone and
looking at a 65, 70 or keeping it at 75, there's uncertainty
with that. We just don't know where this thing's going to
eventually go. And to Mr. Baker's point about what's happening
that's out of our control in Kansas, how is that really going
to impact us when that can be a huge impact on raising the
background levels which even tightens it even more for us.
    The permitting process that's already in place is
effective. We believe the 75 parts per billion number is the
right number right now. We're making significant progress to
getting to that point and would challenge anybody to question
the quality that we have here in Nebraska specifically on our
air quality.
    The other point is that on the regulatory burden side is
that we have to stay competitive. And in order to stay
competitive on a global market, we're competing with countries
that basically are cheating the system through manipulating
currency and trading practices that are currently in place that
are being allowed. And the more that we have these stringent,
burdensome regulatory, and costly I might add, regulations, the
harder it's going to be for us to compete. And where is the
return on that?
    Again as I said, the health's important to us. We all work
and live in these communities as well, that's part of our
mission statement at Nucor, but there has to be a cost benefit
analysis and were getting to the point of, as Mr. Baker said, a
point of it just doesn't make any sense.
    Senator Fischer. Thank you. Dr. Corbin.
    Mr. Corbin. I agree about uncertainty. The uncertainty that
I'm concerned about is when I'm going to have my next asthma
attack or when my asthma is going to get worse.
    It would be hard for me to believe as a public health
professional that all of these medical associations and public
health groups that I've listed on the hand out are somehow
conspiring against business. They are trying to make the
country healthier and they are all of the belief that lowering
the standards will do that.
    The--and by the way, I should point out conspire means
breathe together, the original and that's what we should all be
doing: We should all be breathing together, not working against
each other.
    So there's ample evidence and usually we have what's called
a precautionary principle and that it says when it's--when
you're in doubt about when it's going to harm your health, you
error on the side of good health.
    Senator Fischer. Thank you.
    Mr. Zimmerer.
    Mr. Zimmerer. Well, part of my resume you left off, I ran
the wellness program at Faith Regional Health Services as one
of my other duties----
    Senator Fischer. My apologies, my apologies.
    Mr. Zimmerer. Appreciate--I appreciate the doctor's
comments on this, you know, but I'm also a Husker fan and you
say, well, how is that related? Well, you know, when we talk
about the new coach, Coach Riley isn't setting the team goal to
reach the Super Bowl. Of course not. That's not attainable
through the college system. So what they do is they set goals
to win the Big 10 and then maybe win the national championship,
but those are all attainable goals. Those are something you can
put the team's efforts toward.
    This goal that they're setting now is unattainable and it's
unrealistic and it's just going to put our businesses at risk,
so I'll leave it at that.
    Senator Fischer. If I can follow up with you. I believe
from the standard that was set in 2008, California basically is
in nonattainment; do you know about that?
    Mr. Zimmerer. I do, yes.
    Senator Fischer. And they get, like, a waiver or something,
is that right, for the next 20 years, and it's accepted that
they will never attain the previous standard or the current
standard that we have from 2008; is that correct?
    Mr. Zimmerer. Absolutely.
    Senator Fischer. What happens to California if we see the
standard lower? Are we just saying, well, you couldn't meet the
previous one, we know that, and we know you're never going to
meet this one too? What happens?
    Mr. Zimmerer. And that is the concerning part, Senator,
when we're talking about, you know, you're in a nonattainment
area, we talk about critical infrastructure needs of our
highway system, you know, possibly being at risk here, how is
that fair that Nebraska is hindered by these restrictions and
not some other State? These are----
    Senator Fischer. So California wouldn't have to--they
wouldn't be affected by any of those restrictions even though
they're in a nonattainment area, because they have this waiver
basically 20 years right now, so they can continue to build
roads, they can continue to build manufacturing plants even
though they're never meeting the standards?
    Mr. Zimmerer. I believe EPA has yet to clarify that, but I
believe if they are lifting the ban on the restrictions for
California, then that would, yet, eliminate the violations.
    Senator Fischer. OK. Thank you.
    I have some questions for Mr. Baker. And I do thank you for
your testimony and I'm very happen you're here today.
    As you mentioned, Nebraska's a hundred percent public power
State. I happen to be very proud of the fact that Nebraskans
own the electricity that we use. Do you believe that Nebraska
and Nebraskans will be disproportionately affected by this rule
because we are a public power State, and what actions are the
utilities in the State going to have to take in order to meet
the standard if it--if it is lowered to 65 parts per billion?
What actions are going to have to be taken, and do you have any
idea what the cost of that will be?
    Mr. Baker. Thank you for that question, Senator.
    You know, as a public power entity, I don't know that it
would be fair to say that public power in and of itself would
be singled out or have a disproportionate impact. I will go
back to some of my testimony that says we have no profit margin
that's built into our rate structure, so any and all costs on
this regulation, and the myriad of other regulations, are a
direct pass-through to our customer owners because of that.
    You know, you might be able to draw a conclusion and say
at, you know, public power entities without a profit, it is--it
is a direct impact to our customer owners, so in that way, you
could, but I don't know that the----
    Senator Fischer. So basically, every Nebraskan's going to
be paying more for electricity?
    Mr. Baker. They will pay whatever--well, whatever those
utilities that are representing them need to spend more money
in order to be in compliance with this particular rule, it will
directly impact that bottom line.
    To some of your other questions on that, you know,
logically and as we talked about before, you know, when you're
facing a regulation and when something with the ozone they're
looking at nitrogen oxides, I think it would be reasonable to
assume the EPA is looking for any industries, in particular
though electric generating companies and those facilities, to
put in technologies that would control nitrogen oxides.
    I would say in most cases, almost all of the utilities in
the State of Nebraska have deployed technologies to remedy
that. We have put in catalytic reduction units, you know, much
like a, you know, much like a catalyst on a car, you know, to
control the emissions on many of our big units.
    We also deploy what they call low nitrogen oxide burners
and technologies that do some things to reduce nitrogen oxides
that way as well. Again, we're getting to a point where there
wouldn't be much more that we could really do.
    I would also caution and bring to the forefront that half
of the ozone that we're measuring comes from natural
background. Of the half that's remaining, it's only a
fractional part that's really coming from industry. The large
majority of that remaining fraction is coming from
transportation.
    It seems to me that a strategy would be better to focus on
kind of the mobile sources much like in the State of
California. Those are some of the reasons why those areas
suffer from such huge attainment issues because they have so
many people that are on the roads and that's why you see a lot
of the California emissions on vehicles, they're different than
the rest of the Nation. It's because of transportation.
    So it seemed with fuel, fuel efficiency standards and such
like that, you can make more. You can get more bang for the
buck than you would on limiting the economic development
opportunities of whole parts of our country and whole parts of
our State by reducing that standard. There would be very little
on the industrial side that you could do to control some of
those emissions.
    Senator Fischer. Are there discussions by the EPA to
further reduce emissions from vehicles? Do you know or has the
focus been on utilities and manufacturing with these rules?
    Mr. Baker. You know, my experience has been it's hard to
say with EPA right now. We've--I've got my hands full just
worrying about producing electricity in the myriad of
regulations that we're facing on that front. And of course,
we've just recently had the Clean Power Plan which is, you
know, trying to do other things, you know, to the industry.
    So would they be looking at fuel efficiency standards, I
think a reasonable person would say that they probably are
looking at ways to ratchet that down.
    But I don't know if the fuel efficiency standards, how much
they actually take credit for that in issues like ambient air
quality standards with ozone. I'm not sure about that.
    Senator Fischer. OK. I would like to take a minute and
highlight the--what you believe is a very robust energy
portfolio that many Nebraska utilities are now incorporating
and I commend our utilities for taking the initiative to
introduce these new fuel sources like natural gas for utilizing
renewable energy sources to produce electricity. I think a
balanced energy portfolio is very, very important for all of us
here in this State and in this country.
    And I also know that we are blessed that we have an
abundance of natural resources in this country and they need to
be managed correctly so that we can ensure domestic energy
security as we move forward.
    Mr. Baker, I would ask if you can describe more about the
impact that these proposed standards and if you want to throw
in other EPA regulations, that would be fine, would have on our
energy reliability and what are the potential costs that
utilities face.
    You know, we as Senators, we always hear about regulations
and most of the time the negative impact that they have on
Nebraska families, so I would ask your opinion on that.
    Mr. Baker. Thank you, Senator. I appreciate that question
and that perspective.
    You know reliability, as I stated in my opening remarks,
is, you know, is critical to the success of utilities in the
State of Nebraska. We want reliable, affordable and
environmentally sensitive electric generation for our customer
owners.
    Reliability, I would say would be impacted in some ways and
it should be no surprise, I think to you, that, you know, the
EPA has a concerted effort to try and reduce the dependence of
coal fire generation in the United States. The regulations--an
objective observer would say there's a whole-scale effort to
try and limit the amount of electricity that's produced by that
fuel source.
    A reduced ozone standard could have, when measured with all
the other regulations that we're facing, have the impact of
reducing our ability to generate electricity using coal. That
added to all the other, you know, the Cross-State Air Pollution
Rule, the Clean Power Plan, limitations that we have on coal
ash of where we can bury it and what we need to do with it and
how we need to measure on that and issues on water discharges
and thermal issues and just the entire, you know, the entire
list of different regulations that we face, really limit our
ability to produce coal.
    Two of the utilities in the State of Nebraska have nuclear
in their portfolios. Omaha Public Power District does. Nebraska
Public Power District does. We're very proud to have that zero
carbon producing generation in our portfolios, and many
utilities have been--begun adding a lot of renewables into the
mix as well.
    If you diminish the amount of coal fire generation that we
have and only to our proximity to mines where we have very
affordable transportation rates, you know, to use that coal and
to generate electricity in a very clean manner with proven
technologies, you know, to capture some of these contaminants,
what you're left with are a lot more renewables, right.
    The Clean Power Plan is really pushing to bring more
renewables into a portfolio. That's the tie-in to the
reliability because the renewables aren't there all the time;
solar is not there at night. Wind doesn't blow in July in the
State of Nebraska, or in many parts of the country when it's
very, very hot. So what do you do when you can't produce base-
load generation using our tried and true and clean, you know,
coal fire generation and you have limited access to nuclear in
these days, you have nothing left. You have some natural gas
which we have in the State of Nebraska, but we need a huge
amount of infrastructure build-out to bring a lot of natural
gas, unlike maybe the State of Texas.
    So you would--that is where you would have the
unreliability aspect, because you would need to have some base-
load generation to supply activity when the sun's not shining
and when the wind's not blowing.
    And absent--absent having a build-out of natural gas or
fossil reserves that you can rely on, that I think would be the
tie into to the reliability.
    Senator Fischer. Statewide, could you tell me how much of
our portfolio for electricity is a percentage that would be
reliant upon a coal-fired plant? I've heard two-thirds; is that
about what it is?
    Mr. Baker. I think somewhere a little more than 50 percent
right now in its current state, but you may or may not be
familiar, like at Omaha Public Power District, last year our
board of directors made an announcement we're retiring three of
the units. Three of the five units that we have at our North
Omaha power plant.
    It wasn't a direct result of the Clean Power Plan, it
wasn't a direct result of the Mercury and Air Toxic Standard,
it wasn't a direct result of the Cross-State Air Pollution
Rule. I'm just naming a couple, two or three right now, as an
example; it was because of the myriad of regulations that we
were facing where we looked and said that these units were not
going to be viable and it wasn't economically feasible to
invest a whole lot of money for their continued operation. And
when we look to the future and, of course, our planning horizon
is 15 or 20 years into the future, you know, we needed to make
some certainty in decisions that we were making. So we last
year made a decision to retire three units at our North Omaha
power station.
    That will have a consequence of improving, you know, on an
air quality emission profile that will be less air emissions
coming from those units because the will no longer be in
operation.
    Senator Fischer. How do you handle your base-load capacity
then? If, I mean, you mentioned with renewables, if the wind
doesn't below, you can't turn on the lights, there's no storage
right now for the electricity produced in that way?
    Mr. Baker. Correct.
    Senator Fischer. So how are you going to manage--if we have
a turnover really quickly, which I don't think is possible to
see that happen very quickly, to close coal-fired electric
plants, but if you do have a turnover, how do you handle base-
load capacity and what--what do you see, I guess, happening to
the utility in the future then?
    Mr. Baker. So at Omaha, Nebraska Public Power District, I
can tell you we had some excess capacity that was in our
portfolio so we could take those units out of service, and keep
in mind three units of the five is about half of the generation
from that facility, so it's a little shy of 300 megawatts of
generation that we were going to take out of or portfolio.
    That margin, we were still OK looking to the future from my
company's perspective, I don't foresee us building another
nuclear plant for baseload. Renewables, as I've already stated,
are kind of there to fill in some gaps. With an inability to
build any future coal-fire generation, the only thing that we
would really have left to add for extra capacity would be
natural gas combined cycle is where we would look to meet that
gap. I would say that would.
    Senator Fischer. And you would have to fill that gap with a
source like natural gas, correct?
    Mr. Baker. At some point you would have to build extra
generating capability to take up the slack and to cover those
times when renewables aren't there. And right now the only
thing that's really left would be natural gas, in my opinion,
and kind of looking at, you know, looking at the future right
now in the short term, that's--that would probably be it.
    Senator Fischer. We had talked about a nonattainment
designation and the impact that it may have. I would like to
know since you represent OPPD, what impact do you think a
designation of nonattainment would have on Omaha, how would
that affect further development really in the metropolitan area
of our State?
    Mr. Baker. Thank you, Senator.
    You know, as you have heard, I think it would be crippling.
The permitting that you would need to undergo for bringing in
any new sources, any new industries into the area would be
massive and very expensive. Not to mention some of the
unintended consequences that you would have.
    I know from first hand working with organizations like the
Metro Area Planning Agency in Omaha metro area, we've been
looking at this issue for over 5 years. Omaha Public Power
District, the State of Nebraska and really even the State of
Iowa, because this isn't--it would affect Omaha for sure and
Douglas County and some of the surrounding counties, it would
also effect Iowa, so the Iowa Department of Natural Resources
has been involved.
    We have been in a partnership with some of those other
groups to do what they call Little Steps, Big Impact. And so
some of the consequences of nonattainment from the perspective
of the inability to bring in other industries which are so
vital to kind of the economic viability of those communities,
but some of the simple things like the way that you would
dispense your gasoline may have to change and some limitations
that we would have on our ability to car pool, there might be
local standards or State standards or maybe even a Federal, you
know, through EPA imposed on us where you would have to do
more, you know, more car pooling.
    Which, you know, on the surface would be a good thing, but
there's also that negative impact of what kind of build-out you
would need from a public transportation perspective, which we
may not have the ability to do.
    But for the last 5 years, we've been trying to work to
educate the communities of what these negative impacts would
be, absent really any industrial impact, just on the lifestyles
of people and try to encourage them to car pool when it made
sense, try to encourage them to mow their lawns in the evening.
    There are a lot of unintended consequences of setting that
standard too low which at this point, depending on where that
level is, could really impact--could impact individuals and
families in the community in very negative ways.
    Senator Fischer. Thank you very much for answering my
questions; I appreciate it.
    Next, Mr. Kinter, you're up. Here we go. You mentioned the
very difficult global environment that we're seeing with our
steel companies now. I guess I would like you to expand on that
a little bit and really how that's going to affect Nucor
specifically, if you could, and how you're going to deal with
your competition.
    Mr. Kinter. OK, first off, Nucor is never afraid of a
fight, as long as it's on a level playing field.
    Senator Fischer. I've toured your plant, so tough people.
    Mr. Kinter. And that's what we talk about a lot is that
we're not afraid to compete as long as it's on a level playing
field.
    Senator Fischer. Exactly.
    Mr. Kinter. So I would start off with that and say that
again, to what we have here in America versus the air quality
in different parts of the world is completely different. And
we're asked to continue to operate and be permitted under such
regulatory burden, it's hard for us to compete.
    Again, not saying that the rules and regulations and the
permits that are in place are for the right thing. We do agree
we need to operate in a healthy and safe manner, but in order
to stay competitive with the markets right now, and some of
this understand is outside of the scope of the EPA; it has to
do with the trading issues that of course we've talked publicly
a lot about, I'm sure you're aware of as well.
    Just to put it in perspective--and Mr. Baker did a great
job of covering as well--but our second largest input to making
steel is energy. We are the largest fired electricity in the
State of Nebraska, so as you can imagine our power bill is
significant the way it is already.
    Our estimates are looking at 20 to 30 percent increase in
electrical costs, specifically to this rule, and that's on not
to mention the Greenhouse Gas Rules and the Clean Power Rule
and things that are coming along the pipeline there as well.
    So to put it in perspective, we have 24 operating steel
mills in this country, billions just for us specifically here
in Nebraska, which multiply it by all our other plants. Again
when our margins are so tight, as I mentioned in our testimony,
that millions of dollars equates to less profit and less
success for the company.
    Of course, we have a number of shareholders and folks that
we need to continue to be profitable. And there are numerous
examples of steel companies today, right now, that are shutting
down because they're no longer profitable and successful. So we
definitely have concerns with that.
    In regards to the renewable discussion, I would just add
that for Nucor, we have many customers that are into their own
business as well, so we are supportive of that. Under two
circumstances: One, it needs to be reliability, and it also
needs to be economical. Those are the two things that we should
be looking at when we're looking at renewables.
    Right now, because of coal and what it is, specifically for
Nebraska that's a huge baseload for us. And we are concerned
about the new born in the renewable energy business, where is
the reliability going to be and of course the costs associated
with it.
    Senator Fischer. Can you tell me the difference in how you
produce steel as a company here in the United States and
compare it to how steel is produced overseas and what you can
tell us about the environmental impact on both of those cycles?
    Mr. Kinter. Sure. Sure.
    Nucor, hundred percent of the steel that Nucor makes is
with the electric arc furnace technology----
    Senator Fischer. Tell us, how does that work, though.
    Mr. Kinter. We use electricity to basically create an arc
in our furnace which melts the steel at approximately 300
degrees Fahrenheit, that's the electric arc furnace technology.
Nucor basically invented that and it started in Europe in the
early 1960s, and Nucor kind of took that and expanded upon it.
We now produce almost 20 million tons of steel in the United
States all using electric arc furnace technology.
    In doing so, our greenhouse gas emissions are a third to
two-thirds less than what we would call an integrated facility
which uses the natural iron ore out of the ground to produce
steel. So significantly much more energy intensive process,
because you're taking it from the ground and produce the steel,
where a lot of the process has already happened when we take
the scrap metal and put it to electricity.
    So environmentally, our impact is much less. Obviously,
we're recycling a product that otherwise would have ended up in
a landfill. And that's a success story on the scrap side as
well because, you know, there are still many countries that
don't have a way of recycling scrap. We have that here. We have
a great network of scrap handlers and dealerships throughout
the country that scrap has become a great example of how
recycling should work. I mean, we've always said we were green
before green was really cool, because we've been doing it since
the 1960s.
    Senator Fischer. Good. Your comment that the proposed rule
will hurt economic development, and you said reduce investment
in communities in Nebraska that that's disturbing to hear. Can
you talk about how the manufacturing sector typically grows
around one of your steel mills and do you see additional
facilities develop around your steel mill, what about jobs, you
know, just the effect on a local area with say one of your 24
plants?
    Mr. Kinter. Sure. Sure. With every one steel job, seven
more are created in the community. And when you look at various
partners that we have specifically in Norfolk, we have a number
of facilities and industries have grown around Nucor and buying
various pieces of steel or supplying us with inputs that we
need for making steel.
    One thing to point out, and we focused a little bit on
Omaha and the concerns there, but one thing to consider is I
would--we would consider Norfolk to be in a rural part of the
State, more or less. And when it comes to ozone and how we're
going to get to the levels EPA is proposing is through two
ways: is through offsets and it's through technology.
    Senator Fischer. You said the technology's not there to
reach, to reach the proposed rules. Did I hear that correctly
in our opening?
    Mr. Kinter. For the steel-baking electric arc business, the
SER technologies that Mr. Baker talked about are out there. We
have yet to find somebody that can put a CR system on an
electric arc furnace. As you've seen the facility before that
would be very challenging to do that.
    It's not there yet, could it be there in 10 to 20 years,
possibly. Offsets is the way that Nucor would have to go and in
looking at a rural community, where do we get the offsets from?
There isn't a whole lot of manufacturing, although we're proud
of our manufacturing areas that we have in Norfolk, there are
some, but when you look at Nucor and what we do and where we
need to get those offsets.
    Technology isn't there yet, and there really aren't offsets
for us to grow. So to your point about growing in Norfolk and
bringing in more business, quite honestly the last thing from
the environmental perspective what we would probably want to do
right now is try to attract somebody that produces a lot of
NOx and volatile organic compound emission in
Norfolk because that would keep us from growing.
    Senator Fischer. Under the proposed rule, do you have to
find an offset in a local community within a certain radius?
You said the offsets aren't available in Norfolk, can you
look--can you look elsewhere? Can you look anywhere in the
State? Can you look in other States or is it specific to a
region that you're located in? I don't know the answer.
    Mr. Kinter. There is some flexibility in that. Again, it's
how it's interpreted and how even the State of Nebraska would
look at that and how the different areas are set up when a
nonattainment actually comes in place.
    And again, speaking on--to the uncertainty about 65
percent, 70, that's a big difference. 70 versus 65. 70 is one
thing, but when you start talking about 65, that would stop
Nucor from growing, period. There just wouldn't be any way we
can get down to the levels we need to, as far as expanding.
    Does Mr. Baker alluded to 70 offers some flexibility, but
again, it's just the challenge to figure out how we would get
there and where those offsets would come from.
    1.8 million people in Nebraska. We do have some industries
in Nebraska, but unfortunately it would be hard to come up with
where those offsets would come from, no matter where it is in
the State.
    Senator Fischer. You know, a lot of times I hear about, you
know, rules and regulations, how burdensome they are. Can you
tell me any current rules, regulations out there, if you have
to go through a permitting process, to expand, what's the
effect of that? You know, I can speak to environmental impacts
statements with road building, they can last 6 to 8 years. We
have a case where one lasted 19 years to go through, what kind
of permitting process do you have to go through with your
company, and what are we looking at for a timeframe there?
    Mr. Kinter. Sure. We're what you would call a class one
major source of Nebraska. There's very few, I think there is 20
or so on that list. And we go through a process called new
source review and the prevention of sedimentary program and the
also the Title 5 operating permit process--the Title 5
operating permit process and in private business, we don't have
a whole lot of patience, of course, and there's always
opportunities for us to get better with project planning and
working with the State agencies to get the permits.
    But as an example, when we went through our recent
expansion here, about 2 years ago, it took us approximately 15
months to get our most recent air quality permit. Typically,
EPA and even DEQ will say 12 to 18 months for that process to
happen. We're concerned that if we move into these lower ozone
ground-level numbers we're talking about, and nonattainment
specifically, who knows how long it would take. Because you're
looking at what they call a lowest achievable emission rate
technology, which is, again, back to this whole technology
thing that we don't even know what that is right now on an
electric arc furnace. So to go in with a new permit to try to
talk about some technology that doesn't even exist yet to get
to us where the levels we need to be, we don't know how we
would do it.
    So yes, it's a--the permitting process right now that we
have in place takes time. Again, the DEQ here, specifically in
Nebraskans, been great to work with, been a great, you know, to
work with over the years. But again, this uncertainty and then
moving into these new levels that we're talking about and the
process it would take to get there, not to mention EPA
oversight on all of our permits, which is what we have, we may
never get a permit.
    Senator Fischer. Does the EPA ever account for costs in the
permitting process? Do they ever consider that, or is that just
up to you?
    Mr. Kinter. Well, again, when we're talking specifically
about establishing ambient air quality levels such as the
ground-level ozone, EPA is required to do a cost benefit
analysis. And the recent case ruling that came out in regards
to EPA not specifically doing that cost benefit analysis, I
think, came back to haunt them a little bit.
    And again, that's where our concern is with this one as
well is that where is the cost benefit analysis and are we
really getting enough bang for our buck, quite honestly, to--in
having the healthier air and citizens being more healthy. We're
not--we don't see that correlation, quite honestly.
    Senator Fischer. OK. Good lead in for my question, thank
you very much. Good lead in for questions for Dr. Corbin. And
again, thank you so much for being here. I appreciate your
testimony.
    Mr. Corbin. I feel a little alone.
    Senator Fischer. That's what happens when you're a minority
witness, so. No, but I'm very, very happy that you're here. I
appreciate your views on this, sir.
    The EPA concludes that long-term exposure to ozone likely
causes respiratory mortality based on a single study, and you
mentioned that I believe the Jerrett 2009 study. Did you
mention that in your testimony?
    Mr. Corbin. No, I mentioned the Lancet study.
    Senator Fischer. The Lancet study, OK. The study that I
have here was a Jerrett 2009 study, and that study found that
there was an association between long-term ozone exposure and
mortality caused by respiratory diseases, but it--but not in
southern California where the highest ozone concentrations in
the country occur.
    That didn't make any sense to or for me. Wouldn't it make--
wouldn't it make sense that there would be an association found
where we have the highest ozone concentrations exist?
    Mr. Corbin. Yes, that's a 2000--I'm not familiar with that
study.
    Senator Fischer. OK.
    Mr. Corbin. But there's been plenty since then that don't
say that. And I might just want to respond a little bit because
I've been attending OPPD meetings for at least 3 years now on a
regular basis, their board meetings. I'm familiar with their
goal for renewables with 10 percent, and now I'm very proud to
say because of people have gone before OPPD and tried to make a
case for renewables, that they've--that they are going to close
down those units and change to coal and that we also live in a
different environment in terms of how the--we're part of the
Southwest Power Pool here and OPPD and so when people talk
about, you know, businesses, the fastest growing business in
the United States and, indeed, in most of the world is
renewables. And that's what's creating most the jobs.
    Companies like Facebook and Google are going a hundred
percent renewable energy and they'll--the reason they're going
to Iowa instead of Nebraska is because Iowa has higher
renewable energy and they also have a lower rates than we do in
Nebraska. So higher renewables; lower rates. So better health.
    Warren Buffett is--Berkshire Hathaway Energy is heavily
invested in that, and who here wouldn't want to say that after
Fukushima that we are glad that there are regulations on our
nuclear plants to make sure that we are all safer and that we
don't have a terrible incident like they did there. That's when
Federal regulations are at their best.
    I can't deny that there are rules that sometimes don't make
sense, that's what we need to do is make--make those so that
they really work and that--but to use your--what you were
saying earlier, that California hasn't been in compliance, so
why is everybody worried about everything when everybody can
get extensions time and time again. OPPD's had extensions on
certain things.
    So, if anything, you could argue the EPA is too weak
because they keep giving groups and all kinds of things
extensions. And then, of course, the air is--the air that we
all breathe, and so you've already talked about the fires and
all of those kinds of things.
    So it is something that we're all in it together. And as I
said to Russ before we started, we're not adversaries, we want
the same end. We just disagree, somewhat, on how fast and when
and what the best ways to get there.
    So I think that there's--there's--we certainly are making
progress in a lot of this from a public health point of view. I
don't think the progress is fast enough; obviously, there are
people who differ in that opinion.
    But I think there's a lot of evidence to say--and I know
some people don't like to hear the word climate change, but the
fact is it's not a belief. It's real. And it is those things
that we are talking about renewable energies and all of those
things that are going to hurt the State more if we don't do
something now.
    Senator Fischer. I've been looking at the Clean Power Plan
regulations that have been finalized and you mentioned Iowa and
perhaps Nebraska has lost some business opportunities here in
the State because of the less expensive energy electricity in
Iowa.
    Iowa joins Nebraska as being one of the 10 biggest losers
under the Clean Power Plan, and Nebraska, I always say, that
that means that the people of Nebraska are the losers because
we do have public power in this State.
    But in Iowa, I'm just amazed--and I'm off topic here, I
fully admit that--but I am amazed that they would be listed
under this Clean Power Plan as one of the 10 biggest losers
because of their wind development. And it just, to me, it shows
how bizarre some of these rules and regulations are that come
out because they don't get credit for that.
    So being a Nebraskan, I'm kind of hopeful that we're going
to see businesses come to the State of Nebraska for our less
expensive electricity because Iowa doesn't get any credit.
    Mr. Corbin. That's one----
    Senator Fischer. So I mean----
    Mr. Corbin. That's one time when I would agree that the
rules don't make sense.
    Senator Fischer. Yes, it's just bizarre.
    Mr. Corbin. You don't get credit for what you've already
done.
    Senator Fischer. Exactly, no, I do fully agree with you,
you know, that we're all here to work and make sure that we do
have clean air, clean water in this State. It's a valuable
resource, so it, you know--to find ways that we can work
together and continue to have an open dialog and respect, I
think that's very important.
    Mr. Corbin. And that bureaucracy, by the way, runs both
ways. So to try to get a permit in some places in Nebraska to
put solar panels on your home, in some places it's multi-page
this and that, and you have to have--if it's a hot water, you
have to have a steam fitter and water doesn't get hot enough
for a steam fitter and electricians have to come and approve it
and an electrician may or may not know anything about solar. So
those--I'm all for----
    Senator Fischer. You and I can work on some issues here.
    Mr. Corbin [continuing]. Streamlining the rules and making
them as simple as possible.
    Senator Fischer. No, I agree. And both wind development now
and the siting and the building of transmission lines, there's
a lot of my neighbors and friends who are upset about the
process there. So there's--there's always challenges. There's
always challenges that we're going to----
    Mr. Corbin. And public health, I mean, when aren't they?
Did the automobile industry say please let us put seat belts
and air bags into cars? That's nothing more that we would
remember do, but we did it, people are safer and the roads are
safer.
    Senator Fischer. If I can ask you some specific questions
with your credentials and background with public health if you
would know these for me, the answers.
    Do you know how many asthma attacks in children nationwide
would be prevented if we lower that ozone standard? Do you have
any information available on that?
    Mr. Corbin. I believe it's in the--in one of the documents
that I did that I handed in, but I don't have the exact, but
there are plenty of organizations that have computed that and,
of course, it is an estimate.
    Senator Fischer. Right.
    Mr. Corbin. But they all agree that it would definitely go
up. And that's when you get into the argument about what's--how
many kids deaths are acceptable and how many aren't.
    And so like I said, all of these organizations that are on
this one letter to President Obama trying to urge the ground-
level ozone level to be more strict, they have studied this
extensively.
    Senator Fischer. OK. And do you know how many studies were
done and that the EPA looked at between the association between
the ozone and asthma symptoms when they did their integrated
some kind assessment, do you know how many studies they looked
at?
    Mr. Corbin. I do not. I would, again, put most of my--the
most respected one that I've seen that's come out is a very
extensive report and it not all about ozone, but that's the
Lancet report which came out this year in June.
    Senator Fischer. I had information that there were 33
studies and only 12 of those found an association between ozone
and asthma symptoms, can you address that?
    Mr. Corbin. I can. I cited my experience with working on
tobacco issues. We heard the same thing, how do you know it's
tobacco that's causing cancer and not the air pollution, the
mold in your house, and all of these kind of things? It is
complicated.
    But there's no evidence, that I know of, that says adding
ozone will make your asthma better. It almost--it won't make
everybody's worse; but it will make a lot of people's worse.
    Senator Fischer. OK. I just wanted to point that out for
the record that in the 33 studies, there were 12 that found an
association between the ozone and asthma symptoms. And this was
from the EPA with their integrated science assessment.
    Mr. Corbin. Remember the ozone goes with the other
pollutants that are coming from some of the same sources, so.
    Senator Fischer. Right.
    Mr. Corbin. They go together.
    Senator Fischer. Right. Well, thank you so much. Appreciate
you being here today.
    Mr. Corbin. Thank you.
    Senator Fischer. Mr. Zimmerer, again, I thank you for your
testimony on Federal regulations and the impact that they have
on businesses and how they affect growth, economic growth in
our communities, which in turn affects all of our families here
in the State of Nebraska.
    I know that local businesses work hard to provide their
communities with jobs, they have public service support and, of
course, everyone tries hard to protect the environment, it's a
priority it for all of us.
    You mentioned in your testimony that the ozone standards
considered in the EPA's proposal would impose real and
immediate hardships to the American worker. Can you tell me
what you mean about that?
    Mr. Zimmerer. Absolutely. And I think my colleagues to my
right also mentioned these in their statements, but just
talking about the capital investment needed for companies to
come into compliance. Great companies like Nucor Steel, they
have to invest capital in these projects where, in fact, they
could be invested in increasing their goods and services and
increasing their market to create jobs that will put more taxes
in our communities, tax dollars in our communities, to pay for
those community service programs that help enhance the lives of
our neighbors.
    Senator Fischer. So this--obviously, you believe then that
this proposal would have a really large ripple effect, then,
throughout a local community in the workers that live there?
    Mr. Zimmerer. Absolutely. You know, when we're talking
about a large tax base, you know, those taxes are divvied up
amongst many programs and services, but some of those expenses
will have to come out of that. The State burden for these types
of regulations will trickle down to the city, and in that case,
programs will have to be cut, services will have to be cut.
And, you know, I would hate to be at the city council chambers
when I have to decide which one of those programs is more
important than the other.
    And so I think that's where I look at it from a city
perspective as well is we need to do this in a balanced
approach. And I understand the doctor here, and I was going to
give him a hug when he wasn't feeling loved.
    But you know, we have to do it with balance. And that's
what I ask for. We can't have EPA acting as its own form of
government; it is an agency to be controlled by, you know, by
the people, and when I hear, you know, 14 State Governors wrote
in a letter with concerns that, you know, bring us to the table
when we're discussing this. Help us help you get to where the
doctor wants to be, you know. That's--that's what we want. We
just want balance. We can't have one without the other. So to
be successful, we have to work together.
    Senator Fischer. We talked about a little bit earlier when
I was interrupting to ask questions, but the EPA updated their
ozone standards in 2008 and you mentioned in your statement the
EPA delayed implementing the 2008 ozone standard for 2 years
while it pursued reconsideration, and so States are just now
catching up with implementing that standard.
    Particularly, since the EPA proposed implementation rules
for the standard, I think it was just this past December; is
that correct?
    Mr. Zimmerer. Correct. Correct.
    Senator Fischer. Now, the EPA is proposing new ozone
standards that are going to overlap those 2008 standards, so
how does the--how does the delay in implementation challenge
local communities, local businesses when they're tasked with
putting together a plan in order to meet the new--the new
standards coming when they're still working on the old ones,
where does that put businesses?
    Mr. Zimmerer. Right. Well the bad part about presenting
last is John pretty much answered that question. That
uncertainty in the life of businesses is chaos. It leads to
more expenses. It leads to inefficiencies in management and,
obviously, that does have a ripple effect.
    And I think the States are experiencing the same thing,
that's why the Governors are so concerned about it.
    So we are managing, you know, we weren't quite sure where
we were going to go and now we're sure again, but yet we're
going to add more uncertainty by bringing it to the 70 or 65
level, that's just absurd.
    Senator Fischer. So when you're working on implementing the
standards, what, do you have a partnership with the State
Department of Environmental Quality? Are you working more with
the States since they're trying to implement the EPA's rules;
is that true?
    Mr. Zimmerer. Well, you know, just and----
    Senator Fischer. I guess I'm saying instead of directly
with the EPA, you're working more with the State level, right?
    Mr. Zimmerer. Absolutely. I'm starting at the city level.
I'm working with our partners at Nucor Steel, you know, how can
we make them better? How can we improve the quality of services
they provide in their work? How can they make the environment
better? And I'm doing that with all of our businesses.
    But this is just one example of, you know, everybody--like
said in my statement: We're breathing the same air. We all want
what's best. The ozone levels continue to decrease, so let's
see where they go. And then we can have time to study. We can
see what that--what that foreign pollutants are doing to our
ozone. We can tell what the fires are doing to it. We can do
more studies on how it affects asthma in children.
    But, you know, these things need further study. And I think
my two gentlemen to my right said, you know, they don't even
know how to get to where they want to be. So if we don't have
any ideas of how to get there, then we are putting the cart in
front of the horse.
    Senator Fischer. You know, I understand and hear from our
utilities. I hear from large businesses who know about these
proposed rules or final rules, as the case may be, when they
come through, what about our Main Street businesses, our
smaller businesses that truly are, I believe, the life blood of
our communities around this State from, you know, from Omaha to
Valentine? It's our local folks that are, you know, working
hard. Are they aware in your position with the Chamber? Are
they aware of what may be coming and do they have any idea of
what's--what the effect will be?
    Mr. Zimmerer. Well, I think some of them like to--suffer
from the ostrich hiding, you know, his head in the sand and--
but, you know, it's my job as the chamber president to educate
them on the possible consequences of such regulation. And I
think Russ mentioned that, you know, were looking at a 30
percent utility increase, that is significant.
    I mean, we are super conservative here in Nebraska. We all
know that and, you know, we beared the recession pretty well.
We're not out of it by any means, but we did that because we
keep our costs low, you know. We're conservative. We don't
spend over and above what we can. And so to add this 30 percent
cost onto these already burdened businesses will have
significant costs.
    Senator Fischer. When we had talked earlier if an area has
to go into a nonattainment classification and is then able to
reach attainment, what's the process there that the EPA
follows? Is there a certain number of restrictions that have to
be in place for a designated time period or is it just lifted
and growth can continue, you can continue building roads, you
know? How does that work? And what's the time period from the
nonattainment to attainment to being able to grow again?
    Mr. Zimmerer. The time period is unclear, other than what
I've mentioned as far as how it affects our roads and
infrastructure that way.
    But, you know, once an area comes into attainment, they
have to--they have to put in a plan of action with the State--
through the State and then through the Federal Government to
stay and remain in that action, or in that attainment area, and
that can be significant because what they're going to be
looking at is new businesses, new industry coming in there that
are going to have ozone emissions.
    And to be honest, even if you go back from out of
attainment to attainment, there are businesses, businesses like
to be conservative as well, they like to have the facts and
uncertainty about whether they can fall back into that area of
compliance, really is going to prohibit them from creating new
businesses or growing in our--in that particular area. And
that's probably the scariest part is they're just not going to
do it. And what's really scary is, I think to John's point, is
they're going to do it in other countries.
    Senator Fischer. So you believe that even when restrictions
are lifted, it's really going to be hard to encourage
businesses to come to an area that's been in a nonattainment
classification?
    Mr. Zimmerer. Yes, I guess I would have to think the EPA's
got a mindset and say I really don't know what's going to
happen. You know, but let's just do it anyway. I don't want to
go that approach. It doesn't make sense. We have to know what
the consequences are, how we're going to get there before we
can put these restrictions in place.
    Senator Fischer. OK. I would like to ask you all just a
couple questions here for closing.
    First of all, how do you view EPA regulations--and we've
touched on this--but how do you view EPA regulations when we
look the economic growth for our communities and for our State?
If you have an opinion on what kind of impact they have--and
we've touched on that somewhat--but I would like to just hear
any closing comments you may have on that.
    Mr. Baker. I have some comments that I would love to make
on that.
    You know, we're not opposed to EPA. You know, I have a
recollection of EPA being created because we have rivers that
were catching on fire, we had open dumps that were in people's
backyards that were contaminating groundwater, that were
contaminating drinking water for many communities. I mean, it
was necessary, and some would argue maybe even overdue at that
point.
    I think what I'm feeling and maybe what my company and my
industry are feeling right now is just, you know, we've taken
care of maybe the largest percentage of big problems. We don't
have rivers that are catching on fire. We don't have open dumps
that are out there. We, you know, we have mechanisms and
processes and permits that are in place right now that really
have improved our environment.
    And I don't think anybody in the United States--and I would
argue maybe even worldwide--would want to have a perspective,
well, we're going to go out and destroy the environment. We
want to preserve our natural resources and we want to use them
as good stewards of the land that, you know, that we're--that
we have communities in.
    So we support preservation and enhancement of natural
resources and that. I think, and I go back to maybe a little
bit of some of my comments that I provided earlier, you know,
we're now--now that we've taken care of a lot of really big
issues and have really improved the situation across our Nation
with these laws. Now, what we're facing are--we're facing
energy policy that's being enacted through regulation.
    So trying to change the whole source, at least from the
energy perspective, of how you're going to generate
electricity. Not what limitations you should have on conducting
commerce, but actually transforming the country through
regulatory process.
    And we're also maybe down on the tail end where some of
these regulations, you don't have a direct cause and effect of
ratcheting the standard lower or limiting an emission further
or pushing for technology development that is very, very costly
and may have very marginal benefit in the long term. That's the
part I think that, at least from my company and maybe from
electric utility perspective in the State of Nebraska, that's
the part where we have problems.
    There's a lot of unknowns, a lot of uncertainty that, you
know, we tried to express to you in our testimony and that,
marginal benefit for what could be a very extreme cost and
really not for the sake of improving the environment in the way
that I think Congress foresaw EPA and the creation of EPA to
do. So that's kind of my perspective, Senator.
    Senator Fischer. Thank you.
    Mr. Kinter. No doubt that there was and there still is a
need for EPA regulations, I don't think anybody will disagree
with that.
    We are reaching a point of diminishing impact and return on
these rules to the point where it's hard to run a business
because of the scrutiny we have with our permits and how we're
required to operate our facilities. Much more hands-on approach
now, and as Russ alluded to, we're getting much more detailed
in our permits.
    So definitely a need for EPA to be there. We've had a great
relationship with EPA over the years and working through
issues, but where do you draw the line between, you know, the
American way and being able to operate your company the best
way possible, and still being in compliance and the definition
of compliance continues to change?
    Senator Fischer. Thank you.
    Mr. Corbin. I used to teach high school right outside
Washington, DC, at Bladensburg and I would take my students to
the EPA for field trips. As you know, the EPA started under the
Nixon administration, and I agree with all the reasons why it
was created because we did have rivers catching on fire and we
had smog that was worse than it is today, and I guess the
argument would--it is--the critical thing is where you draw the
line.
    And the way I understand right now with the Clean Power
Plan also is that the States have the opportunity to submit
their plan. I would encourage Nebraska to do that and to work
with all the people to create that plan. Not to let it go to
the Federal Government and say you're not going to create your
own plan, so we're going to create it for you. That's exactly
what people have been arguing against, yet the way I understand
it, too, we--we've filed a lawsuit saying it wasn't even a good
thing to do.
    So the EPA is good. Like I've said before, there are times
when any law--and the reason why we don't just have one session
and then say, oh, well, the laws are done is because we try to
improve upon them as time goes on.
    The question is: What is the improvement and what side does
it fall toward? And, obviously, being in public health, I'm
most interested in the public--in preserving the public's
health, which I think a lowering of the standard would do.
    Mr. Zimmerer. Yes, EPA, it is a need--it's needed here in
the United States and I believe that, you know, when we talk
about that balance, and I've said that more than once today,
that's what we're looking for. We're looking for, you know,
with the economy and with our public health and--you know, I
agree with the doctor here. But there are other health
consequences. If we're taking money out of families' pockets,
we know what they are, they have higher rates of depression,
they are higher rates of obesity, they have--don't receive
appropriate medical care, and I could go on and on. And those--
that isn't coming from research, that's coming from my personal
experience in dealing with these families and working with
them.
    And so that's, I think, you don't always have to--you know,
you also have to balance economy with health, but you have to
look at all aspects of health as well. So that's where I leave
that.
    Senator Fischer. OK. Thank you. As we conclude the hearing
today, I want to, again, expression my gratitude to each of the
witnesses for testifying. We were privileged to hear from a
group of Nebraska stakeholders who provided details on the
challenges faced by businesses, families and communities as the
Administration finalizes the proposed rule to lower the ground-
level ozone standard.
    Nebraska is unique. We are the only 100 percent public
power State in the Nation. We own the electricity that is
generated and consumed within our borders.
    Nebraska is also blessed to have a robust manufacturing
industry and small business community, and these are important
assets that create jobs, ensure that our rural communities and
municipalities continue to thrive.
    Currently, Nebraska has zero counties in nonattainment;
however, under the proposed rule, 57 Nebraska counties will be
classified as being in nonattainment, and many of these
communities are in rural and primarily agricultural areas.
    Furthermore, or the EPA's modeling and data, interpretation
cannot verify that tightening the ozone standard will result in
health benefits. So I have serious concerns about the impact of
the proposed rule and what it will do to impose on small
businesses and energy-intensive businesses and industries some
really, I believe, negative impacts.
    It is clear that imposing additional rules and permitting
requirements on our utilities and job creators will only stifle
economic growth and drive up the costs of important projects.
We should not be in the business of creating unnecessary
regulations that generate more red tape. Instead, we need to
explore policy options that promote growth and enable our job
creators' communities and our families to prosper.
    So I look forward to utilizing the insights that I received
from all of the stakeholders here today at this hearing to do
exactly that.
    Again, I thank you, the witnesses, for appearing today. And
the hearing is now adjourned.
    [Whereupon, at 11:46 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]


