[Senate Hearing 114-248]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]






                                                        S. Hrg. 114-248

                            BUSINESS MEETING

=======================================================================

                                MEETING

                               before the

                              COMMITTEE ON
                      ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
                          UNITED STATES SENATE

                    ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

                             FIRST SESSION

                               __________

                             JUNE 10, 2015

                               __________

  Printed for the use of the Committee on Environment and Public Works



[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]





       Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys

                               __________

                        U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

99-913 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
  For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
  Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
         DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
                          Washington, DC 20402-0001














               COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS

                    ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS
                             FIRST SESSION

                  JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma, Chairman
DAVID VITTER, Louisiana              BARBARA BOXER, California
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming               THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho                    BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas               SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
JEFF SESSIONS, Alabama               JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi            KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND, New York
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska                CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota            EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska

                 Ryan Jackson, Majority Staff Director
               Bettina Poirier, Democratic Staff Director































                            C O N T E N T S

                              ----------
                                                                   Page

                             JUNE 10, 2015
                           OPENING STATEMENTS

Inhofe, Hon. James M., U.S. Senator from the State of Oklahoma...     1
Boxer, Hon. Barbara, U.S. Senator from the State of California...     4
Barrasso, Hon. John, U.S. Senator from the State of Wyoming......    32
Cardin, Hon. Benjamin, U.S. Senator from the State of Maryland...    61
Carper, Hon. Thomas, U.S. Senator from the State of Delaware.....    67
Markey, Hon. Edward J., U.S. Senator from the State of
  Massachusetts..................................................    84

                               LEGISLATION

The text of S. 1140, the Federal Water Quality Protection Act....    34
The text of Cardin-Boxer Amendment No. 1.........................    63
The text of Boxer Amendment No. 1................................    74
The text of Boxer Amendment No. 5................................    77
The text of Markey Amendment No. 1...............................    86
The text of Boxer Amendment No. 6................................    89


                            BUSINESS MEETING

                              ----------


                        WEDNESDAY, JUNE 10, 2015

                                        U.S. Senate
                  Committee on Environment and Public Works
                                                    Washington, DC.
    The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:33 a.m. in room
406, Dirksen Senate Building, Hon. James Inhofe (chairman of
the committee) presiding.
    Present: Senators Inhofe, Barrasso, Capito, Crapo, Boozman,
Wicker, Fischer. Rounds, Sullivan, Boxer, Carper, Cardin,
Whitehouse, Merkley, and Markey.

            OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES INHOFE,
            U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA

    Senator Inhofe. Our meeting will come to order.
    We do not have a lot of people here yet. We are going to go
ahead and Senator Boxer and I will do our opening statements.
Then we will wait for our quorum to show up.
    I have made addressing EPA regulatory overreach one of my
top priorities as Chairman of the Senate Environment and Public
Works Committee. That is why I am particularly glad that today
we are marking up the bipartisan S. 1140, the Federal Water
Quality Protection Act after holding a bicameral oversight
hearing in February, three field hearings in Alaska and
Nebraska, and a legislative hearing.
    Two weeks ago, EPA issued a final rule that expands Federal
authority under the Clean Water Act by changing the definition
of ``waters of the United States.'' Absent legislation to stop
it, this new rule will go into effect later this summer.
    EPA took this action despite the fact that according, to
the Corps of Engineers, 60 percent of the comments, during the
comment period, opposed the rule, including 32 States, the U.S.
Conference of Mayors, the National League of Cities and the
National Association of Counties. We have all these people
opposing this very stringent rule.
    I have to add at this point that in my State of Oklahoma,
which I do not think is much different from any other State,
our Farm Bureau head, Tom Buchanan, says the problems the
farmers and ranchers in Oklahoma face have nothing to do with
anything you find in the farm bill. It is all overregulation by
the EPA and the water regulations that scare them the most.
That is their No. 1 priority right now.
    Fortunately, this bipartisan legislation will stop the
final rule and make EPA and the Corps of Engineers go back and
redo it. This time, they cannot avoid consultation with States
and local governments. They will have to do a full economic
analysis, including an unfunded mandates analysis, and they
will have to review the impacts on small businesses and small
local government.
    These are process steps they skipped because they claim
that a definition has no direct costs, a claim strongly
disputed by States, local governments, and the Small Business
Administration Office of Advocacy. We know that from the
hearing we had here in these chambers. This legislation also
prevents EPA from issuing a new rule that simply repeats their
regulatory overreach.
    Unlike the rule they issued 2 weeks ago, in a revised rule,
EPA will not be able to claim the power to control land and
water use based on use of water by birds or other animals, the
seepage of water into the ground, water storage, and the
overland flow of flood water. At the same time, the legislation
encourages EPA to regulate streams that actually carry
pollutants to navigable water and wetlands next to streams and
rivers that filter pollutants.
    Before some of you came in, I made the comment that in my
State of Oklahoma, the president of the Oklahoma Farm Bureau,
Tom Buchanan, says their No. 1 concern is this issue. I know
that is probably true in Mississippi and other States too. We
are going to try to correct that.
    Senator Boxer.
    [The prepared statement of Senator Inhofe follows:]

    [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


           OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BARBARA BOXER,
           U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

    Senator Boxer. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
    You heard my chairman say that his priority is going after
EPA overreach. His priority is going after the Environmental
Protection Agency. It is his right, as he and I have said
often. Elections have consequences. When I had the gavel, we
did a lot of different things here. He has the gavel and it is
his right.
    I want to remind colleagues that this is the Environment
Committee and not the anti-environment committee. I hope we
will remember that our charge is to protect the people of
America from harmful pollution.
    Today, we are considering legislation that would undermine
one of our Nation's landmark laws, the Clean Water Act, and
roll back protections for the American people, their drinking
water. It will actually roll back protections for 117 million
people.
    We talk a lot about national security, as we should.
Nothing is more important than protecting the lives of the
American people. Members of this Committee should understand
that when we weaken the Clean Water Act, as this bill will do,
we are putting the lives of our people in danger.
    The Clean Water Act prevents the uncontrolled pollution of
the streams, rivers, and lakes where our children swim and that
provide drinking water to millions of Americans. If the Clean
Water Act does not apply, polluters can dump raw sewage that
would sicken children swimming in contaminated waters.
    Factories can discharge industrial waste containing heavy
metals, such as arsenic, lead, and selenium. Drilling companies
can discharge wastewater containing known carcinogens like
benzene and chromium-6. We need a strong Clean Water Act to
ensure this does not happen.
    Decades ago, the United States experienced widespread
damage and degradation to our environment. The Cuyahoga River
in Cleveland, Ohio was on fire and our lakes were dying from
pollution. In 1972, Congress passed the Clean Water Act.
    Unfortunately, the legislation before us today would take
us in the wrong direction by removing protections and creating
more confusion and uncertainty about which waters are
protected. That is why over 80 scientists with expertise in the
importance of streams and wetlands, as well as the Society for
Freshwater Science, have written to us opposing this bill.
    We have also received opposition letters from numerous
sportsmen groups, including the American Fly Fishing Trade
Association, Backcountry Hunters and Anglers, Izaak Walton
League of America, Theodore Roosevelt Conservation Partnership,
Trout Unlimited and many other groups.
    I ask unanimous consent to place all of them into the
record.
    Senator Inhofe. Without objection.
    [The referenced information follows:]


   [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


    Senator Boxer. These groups understand the important link
between clean water and outdoor recreation. These groups work
with Republicans and Democrats alike and they fiercely oppose
this bill.
    Over 40 leading law professors that study, teach, and write
about the Clean Water Act have concluded ``S. 1140 would
constitute a massive weakening of the Clean Water Act.''
    I ask unanimous consent to enter these and other letters of
opposition into the record.
    Senator Inhofe. Without objection.
    [The referenced information follows:]

    [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Boxer. The final Clean Water Rule that S. 1140 will
block clearly protects streams that provide drinking water to
millions of Americans while establishing exemptions for
numerous water bodies that do not impact downstream water
quality.
    For the first time, Federal regulations will explicitly
exclude numerous types of ditches. You are going to hear all
kinds of misinformation on this. This rule excludes numerous
types of ditches, stormwater collection and treatment systems,
artificial ponds, water-filled depressions, puddles, and
recycling water facilities.
    If the Barrasso bill, S. 1140, passes, all of these new
exemptions will be blocked. This bill would create more
confusion for businesses and landowners by taking away new
exemptions and sending EPA and the Corps back to square one.
    After years of uncertainty following two Supreme Court
decisions, we should not pass legislation that would create
more confusion and invite years of new litigation. The Obama
administration's efforts are about protecting drinking water
for American families and businesses, and the process, alluded
to by my chairman, has been open and inclusive. More than 1
million comments were received during a comment period that
lasted over 200 days, and over 400 outreach meetings with
stakeholders and State and local governments were conducted.
    Instead of advancing a bill that would allow more pollution
of our waterways, we should listen to the wide variety of
stakeholders that support the proposed clean water rule. A poll
released last month shows that 78 percent of the people think
Congress should allow the rule to move forward but not in this
committee. Who are they listening to? I will leave that to you
to figure out.
    It is time to restore much-needed certainty, consistency,
and effectiveness and S. 1140 does just the opposite. It would
result in further delay, more uncertainty, and less protection
for the American people.
    [The prepared statement of Senator Boxer follows:]

    [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Boxer.
    We have reached an agreement that we are going to consider
the Manager's Amendment to S. 1140 with members amending that
document. These amendments that come in will be to that
document I just described.
    I want to ask members to keep in mind, we have to have a
quorum of 11 in order to pass this, but our amendments only
need 7. Right now we have 8, so we are going to go through
these as quickly as possible. We have 11 amendments out there
and I want to ask which members seek recognition to each
amendment and allow each member to call up his own amendment.
We can have committee counsel available at the table to answer
questions. At the conclusion of the members' statements and
questions, we will vote on each amendment.
    I would like to start by asking Senator Barrasso if he
would like to make comments about the underlying bill which is
the Manager's Amendment.

           OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN BARRASSO,
             U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF WYOMING

    Senator Barrasso. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I do
appreciate your holding a markup on this bipartisan, pro-
environmental protection, pro-small business legislation.
    S. 1140, the Federal Water Quality Protection Act is
legislation I introduced along with Democratic Senators,
Senator Donnelly, Heitkamp, Manchin, along with other members
of this committee, including you, Mr. Chairman. This is
legislation that will protect our Nation's navigable waterways,
the streams and wetlands that help keep our navigable waters
clean.
    This bill is a testament to the hard work that both sides
of the aisle have done in achieving an agreement on an
environmental protection bill. Our rivers, lakes, wetlands and
other waterways are among America's most treasured resources.
    In my home State of Wyoming, we have some of the most
beautiful rivers in the world, the Snake River, the Wind River
and dozens of others. The people of Wyoming voted to keep these
waterways safe and pristine for their children and
grandchildren. They understand there is a right way and a wrong
way to do this. It is possible to have reasonable regulations
to help preserve our waterways while still respecting the
difference between State waters and Federal waters.
    Unfortunately, the rule the EPA has released does not do
that. In fact, the rule is actually worse than the proposed
rule. This is important because many of my colleagues have been
waiting for the rule to be released and gave the Administration
the benefit of the doubt.
    I am here to tell you that no matter what concessions EPA
has claimed, they added new provisions that greatly expand
their authority. For example, instead of clarifying the
difference between a stream and erosion of the land, the rule
defines tributaries to include any place where EPA thinks it
sees an ordinary high water mark. What looks like, not what is,
but the EPA says what looks like a high water mark.
    Even worse, EPA proposes to make these decisions from their
desks using aerial photographs and laser generated images
claiming a field visit is not necessary. Under the rule, the
Environmental Protection Agency also has the power to regulate
something as ``waters of the United States'' if it falls within
a 100-year floodplain or if it is within 400 feet of navigable
water or a tributary and EPA claims there is a significant
nexus.
    Under this rule, significant nexus means a water feature
that provides ``life-cycle dependent aquatic habitat for a
species.'' If you start drawing 4,000 foot circles around
everything the EPA identifies as a tributary and everywhere
there is a potential aquatic habitat for birds and fish in that
area, I expect nearly the whole Country would be included.
    Mr. Chairman, this is not just me, this is from the
economic analysis of the EPA-Army Clean Water Rule, May 2015,
this year. This is what the EPA says to confirm my suspicions.
``The agencies have determined that the vast majority of the
Nation's water,'' the Nation's water, not the States' water,
not the counties' water, not local water, but the Nation's
water, they think they own it all, ``the Nation's water
features are located within 4,000 feet of a covered tributary,
traditional navigable water, interState water or territorial
sea. We believe, therefore, that very few waters will be
located outside of 4,000 feet and within 100-year floodplain.''
They believe they can control it all.
    Mr. Chairman, in addition, the final rule exempts puddles.
They define that as very small, shallow and highly transitory
pools of water that forms on pavements, that is good, or upland
during and immediately after a rainstorm or similar
precipitation event. It does specifically include other pools
of water created by rain such as prairie potholes, vernal
pools, even if the land where these pools of water form is far
away from any navigable water or even a tributary.
    Since the Supreme Court issued its 2001 decision in the
Swank case, none of these isolated pools of water have been
found to be jurisdictional applying a case by case analysis.
Under this new regulation, nearly all of them will be
considered waters of the United States, giving the
Environmental Protection Agency the power to regulate what you
do on that land.
    These provisions are sweeping and will create uncertainty
in communities all across America. Rather than support an EPA
rule that is actually worse than the proposed rule and does not
represent the interests of our farmers, ranchers, families and
communities, let us move forward with this bipartisan Federal
Water Quality Protection Act to assure the public that we hear
and we understand their concerns. At the same time, let us give
EPA and the Army Corps the certainty they need to confidently
move forward with a new rule that truly reflects the needs of
the constituents that we represent.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I urge my colleagues to vote yes
on this bipartisan piece of legislation.
    [The text of S. 1140 follow:]

    [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

        Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Barrasso.
    Does any member seek recognition for an amendment? Senator
Cardin.
    Senator Cardin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    I would offer Cardin-Boxer Amendment No. 1.
    Senator Inhofe. Cardin-Boxer Amendment No. 1, you are
recognized.

          OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BENJAMIN CARDIN,
            U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF MARYLAND

    Senator Cardin. Thank you.
    Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, our
responsibility is to make sure that we protect the public from
polluters. So when we talk about burdens on different segments
and so forth, we want to make sure our regulatory structure is
fair to all.
    Make no mistake, our burden and our responsibility is on
the public health of the people of this Country. That is why on
a bipartisan basis, we enacted the Clean Water Act to protect
public health. We do not want to go back to rivers catching
fire and the circumstances that Senator Boxer alluded to in her
opening comments.
    I oppose the bill that is before us. Two weeks ago, the
Environmental Protection Agency and the Army Corps responded to
the challenge laid down by the Supreme Court a decade ago. That
decision created uncertainty in case by case determinations as
to what waters would be regulated under the Clean Water Act and
reinstated a science-based protection using sound, peer
reviewed scientific data for clean water.
    That is exactly what we want them to do, to use science, to
use the best data available to protect the public and make sure
that we have clean water.
    For the first time ever, the regulation spells out with
clarity those waters that are not subject to the Clean Water
Act and adopted a narrower working definition of waters of the
U.S. than was the working use prior to the Supreme Court
decision. They listened to the comments made during the review
process as Senator Boxer pointed out. They listened to the
million comments made and tailored a rule that complies with
its responsibility to protect the public in regards to clean
water. They listened to the reasonable concerns expressed by
the stakeholders.
    Therefore, the legislation we have before us, if not
amended, will send EPA and the Army Corps back to the drawing
board and create uncertainty once again where there will not be
clarity as to what is subject to the Clean Water Act because we
have denied the agencies moving forward and Congress has not
adopted the certainty as to what is subject to the Clean Water
regulations. We are talking about wetlands and tributaries that
affect the clean water.
    The amendment I have offered, first, corrects a mistake in
the underlying bill. The goal of the Clean Water Act is not as
stated in the bill before us, to protect traditional navigable
waters from water pollution. That is not the goal stated in the
Clean Water Act. The goal is to restore and maintain the
chemical, physical and biological integrity of the Nation's
waters.
    My amendment corrects the misstatement contained in the
underlying bill but then goes to I think the heart of what I
hope all of us would agree. That is, the provisions will not be
effective if the Administrator and Secretary determine the
implementation of the provisions is likely to increase the
probability of exposure to discharges of toxins and pollutants
in amounts that could adversely impact the health and welfare
of persons served by public drinking water systems, including
infants, children, pregnant women, the elderly and other
vulnerable populations. I say that because we are all subject
to having clean water in our environment but those particularly
susceptible are the most vulnerable, our children, our elderly
and vulnerable populations.
    Second, the amendment says if it would compromise the
safety or heighten the risk of illness from consumption of fish
or swimming, that also would be taken into consideration as far
as the implementation of this bill.
    Mr. Chairman, I would hope my colleagues would accept this
amendment. I remember in some of my previous years in the House
of Representatives, Democrats and Republicans joined together
in the proud tradition of this Country to protect the public.
In every Congress, we looked at ways we could buildupon the
success of the past to protect public health so communities
felt safe in their community with clean water, and I might also
add clean air. I think my amendment makes it clear that we will
put public health first and carry out the burden that we have
to protect the public health.
    [The text of Cardin-Boxer Amendment No. 1 follow:]

    [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Cardin.
    Let me note a little bit on what he said. Senator Cardin
and I were elected to the House in the same year. I remember
very well and believe we have been doing just what you
suggested over those some 28 years now.
    I would only observe that this amendment does not amend the
Clean Water Act but as you point out, sends it back to have
areas where we feel it needs a lot of surgery worked out. I
also am a little concerned about when we give the power to the
Administrator and the Corps. I am not sure I have as much faith
as you in their having that power.
    I would ask for anyone who wants to be heard on this
amendment? Senator Carper.

           OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. THOMAS CARPER,
            U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF DELAWARE

    Senator Carper. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
    Before us we have a bill authored by Senator Barrasso, who
I think is one of our more thoughtful people, who is delightful
to work with and to know. While I cannot support his proposal,
I would say there are several aspects of his bill that do have
merit. I want to mention a couple of them.
    I think a report to Congress on how to ensure communities
are not harmed intentionally by this new rule would be helpful
to ensure EPA stays on the right track. I also believe that the
concept of maps showing watersheds that must be protected is a
good one as long as it is done thoroughly and carefully.
    I commend him for trying to make an honest effort to
address a couple of areas that need to be addressed.
    Having said that, I have not been in lock step with EPA,
none of us have, but I will say this. Gina McCarthy, the
Administrator, has made a strong effort to be as open as I
think she and the agency can be.
    The idea of having a 200 day period in which to receive
input is extraordinary. They did not just get a couple thousand
recommendations for changes, they got a million. I think they
made an honest effort to try to incorporate those into this
final rule.
    Is it perfect? No way, nothing is perfect. While we strive
for perfection as our goal, we cannot be perfect. I am going to
support Ben's amendment. I hope the rest of us will also.
    At the end of the day, some of the things that Senator
Barrasso has called for in his bill deserve support. While
there are other pieces of the legislation that will not allow
me to support it, I commend him for that effort.
    I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    [The prepared statement of Senator Carper follows:]

    [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]




    Senator Inhofe. You will have that opportunity.
    Senator Boxer. Let us go back and forth here.
    Senator Boxer. That is fine.
    Senator Inhofe. Those who want to be heard on the amendment
from this side?
    Senator Boxer.
    Senator Boxer. Thank you so much.
    I want to thank Senator Cardin for his work on this.
    Mr. Chairman, here are the facts. These are the facts. This
is not made up. This comes from American Rivers.
    The EPA estimates that up to 3.5 million people fall ill
from swimming in waters contaminated by sanitary sewer
overflows every year. If we start taking streams out of this
regulatory reach, if we start taking waters out, people can
dump their sewage in there without any type of permit. We will
see this number go up, including the 1.5 million people in
California every year on the beaches.
    We have some pretty strict regulations but even with that,
people get sick from the untreated sewage. There are pathogens
in the water. Cryptosporidium contaminated the drinking water
supply in Milwaukee. In 1993, 400,000 people became ill and 100
people died because they were vulnerable.
    Why on earth does the Environment Committee want to remove
bodies of water from this rule where they can become filled
with these pathogens? Toxic algae blooms, I know my friend has
had direct experience with that. In addition to pathogens, the
high nutrient levels in untreated sewage can cause illness when
they create algae blooms. Symptoms from exposure include memory
loss, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, liver failure,
respiratory paralysis and even coma.
    We are not talking about bureaucracy and EPA overreach. We
are talking about how we can protect our people from these
illnesses.
    I will conclude with this, I think the Cardin amendment
strikes a provision in S. 1140 that would essentially rewrite
the objective of the Clean Water Act. My friend is right. It
sends the rule back. But essentially, because frankly, I do not
think the American people would stand for it 1 second if you
tried to repeal the Clean Water Act, you would be voted out of
office. They do not do that.
    They play with this rule and rewrite the historic objective
of the Act. The historic objective of the Act supported by
Republicans and Democrats overwhelmingly 40 years ago says, we
want to restore and maintain the chemical, physical and
biological integrity of the Nation's waters. This is what
Senator Cardin does. He restores this important definition.
    The amendment also says that the Act is null and void if it
would increase exposure to toxic pollution or increase the
likelihood that people will get sick from consuming fish or
swimming in recreational waters. Colleagues, that is the least
we can do, protect peoples' health.
    The amendment opposed the historic focus of the Clean Water
Act and it does not undo the many achievements of the Act over
the last four decades. I hope we can at least vote yes.
Otherwise, the American people will see that a Clean Water Act
has protected them, even though it certainly has not been
perfect. People have still gotten sick but we have protected
people. We are one of the best in the world in this and that it
is not being rescinded in part by this law. I urge a yes vote.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Boxer.
    Before recognizing Senator Barrasso to respond, does anyone
else wish to be heard on this amendment?
    Senator Barrasso.
    Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    First, I want to specifically thank Senator Carper for his
fine comments. We have worked closely together on a number of
issues. He is an honest broker, continues to be, and it is a
privilege to serve with him as a former Governor, a former U.S.
Member of Congress and now as a Senator. He is someone that I
think really understands his State, the needs and concerns
there. I appreciate his kind comments.
    Mr. Chairman, I do need to oppose the Cardin-Boxer
Amendment No. 1. The bill I propose does not amend the Clean
Water Act, so it does not amend Section 101 of the Act. It is
not necessary to reState those goals.
    In addition, even though rivers and streams that are
sources of drinking water are clearly protected by S. 1140, as
are the wetlands next to those rivers and streams that serve to
filter pollutants, this amendment, the Cardin-Boxer amendment,
gives EPA the authority to vacate the entire bill with a
spurious determination which is my specific concern.
    This would result in the status quo, which is unacceptable
to cities, towns, farmers, ranchers, small business owners,
hardworking taxpayers and those who want clean water and their
livelihoods all across the Country.
    I would urge a no vote on this amendment.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Barrasso.
    The Cardin-Boxer Amendment is before us.
    Senator Cardin. Can I close?
    Senator Inhofe. Of course.
    Senator Cardin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
opportunity to close.
    Let me say, I share Senator Carper's observations that we
need to work together. Senator Barrasso and I serve not only on
this committee together but also on the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee. We have been able to work together and
sometimes we disagree.
    Let me just point out what the bill says. It says, ``The
Federal Water Pollution Act is an Act to protect traditional
navigable waters from water pollution.'' In fact, what the
Clean Water Act says is it is ``to restore and maintain the
chemical, physical and biological integrity of the Nation's
waters.'' That is what the Act says.
    Senator Barrasso, your bill changes the Clean Water Act's
fundamental principle to protect public health. You are
changing it to say ``to protect traditional navigable waters.''
That is a change, a significant change, a fundamental change in
the Clean Water Act.
    The reason why we underscored that with the rest of this
bill is because this is what the Clean Water Act is about. The
Clean Water Act is about people who swim who know that we have
regulations to protect their health. People who live near water
know that we have regulations and a law to protect their health
and that clean water is a national priority. That is what the
Clean Water Act says.
    I understand Senator Barrasso's intent, but that is not
what the bill says. The bill changes the fundamental direction
of the Clean Water Act in addition to stopping the agencies
from moving forward on its regulations.
    I would urge my colleagues to adopt this amendment.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Cardin.
    Is there a motion on the Cardin-Boxer Amendment No. 1?
    Senator Boxer. So moved.
    Senator Inhofe. Second.
    All in favor, say aye.
    [Chorus of ayes.]
    Senator Inhofe. Opposed, no.
    [Chorus of noes.]
    Senator Inhofe. A roll call has been requested. The Clerk
will call the roll.
    The Clerk. Mr. Barrasso?
    Senator Barrasso. No.
    The Clerk. Mr. Booker?
    Senator Boxer. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Boozman?
    Senator Boozman. No.
    The Clerk. Mrs. Boxer?
    Senator Boxer. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mrs. Capito?
    Senator Inhofe. No by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Cardin?
    Senator Cardin. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mr. Carper?
    Senator Carper. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mr. Crapo?
    Senator Crapo. No.
    The Clerk. Mrs. Fischer?
    Senator Fischer. No.
    The Clerk. Mrs. Gillibrand?
    Senator Boxer. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Markey?
    Senator Boxer. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Merkley?
    Senator Merkley. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mr. Rounds?
    Senator Rounds. No.
    The Clerk. Mr. Sanders?
    Senator Boxer. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Sessions?
    Senator Inhofe. No by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Sullivan?
    Senator Inhofe. No by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Vitter?
    Senator Inhofe. No by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Whitehouse?
    Senator Boxer. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Wicker?
    Senator Wicker. No.
    Senator Inhofe. I would remind the Clerk he did not call my
name.
    The Clerk. I am sorry. Mr. Chairman?
    Senator Inhofe. No.
    The Clerk. The yeas are 9 and the nays are 11.
    Senator Inhofe. The amendment is not accepted.
    Senator Carper. I would ask unanimous consent that my
statement be entered for the record at the appropriate place.
    Senator Inhofe. Without objection, of course.
    Senator Carper. I am going to run back to Homeland
Security. We are trying to get a TSA Administrator confirmed. I
am going to run and do that.
    Thanks so much.
    Senator Inhofe. That is important.
    Do other Senators have amendments?
    Senator Boxer. I do.
    Senator Inhofe. Senator Boxer.
    Senator Boxer. I would call up Boxer No. 1.
    Senator Inhofe. Boxer No. 1. Senator Boxer.
    Senator Boxer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    My amendment ensures that the Secretary of the Army and the
Administrator of the EPA retain their authority to protect our
Nation's drinking water supply.
    The Clean Water Act is a critical tool for preventing
pollution of water bodies that provide drinking water. The
final Clean Water Rule protects streams and wetlands that
provide drinking water to 1 in 3 Americans. S. 1140, the bill
before us, would block this important rule and the protection
it provides for our drinking water.
    This amendment is very simple. It simply says that nothing
in this bill affects the Secretary and Administrator's
authority to protect sources of drinking water. Colleagues,
that is the least we can do, the least we can do.
    I hope we can all agree the EPA and the Corps should retain
the authority to ensure that our drinking water supply is safe
and clean.
    I urge my colleagues to vote yes on this amendment.
    [The text of Boxer Amendment No. 1 follows:]

    [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Boxer.
    Let me observe that I have the same problem with this
amendment that I had with the last one, because you are saying
they are without a lot of guidelines, able to have that power.
I would object to this amendment.
    Does anyone want to be heard? Senator Cardin.
    Senator Cardin. Thank you.
    I support the Boxer Amendment. Mr. Chairman, when our
constituents turn on their tap or go to their wells, they
expect the water they are drinking is safe. I do not know of a
more fundamental responsibility we have than to make sure that,
in fact, is real.
    The truth is that as we are chipping away at the
protections we have on clean water and clean air. A lot of
assumptions made by people in this Country are not necessarily
accurate. You have seen recent reports that are challenging, in
some cases, the safety of drinking water.
    This amendment is so straightforward and commonsense. It
does not stop what Senator Barrasso is trying to do in his
bill. It just says we have to guarantee we are doing everything
we possibly can to make sure when you turn on the tap, the
water is safe.
    It seems to me that at a bare minimum, we should have broad
support, if not unanimous support, for this amendment. I do not
quite understand the Chair's objections to saying that the
agency responsible for clean water, you cannot trust to make
sure we have safe drinking water. I do not understand the logic
of that argument.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Cardin.
    Do others want to be heard? If not, Boxer Amendment No. 1
is before us. A roll call has been requested. The Clerk will
call the roll.
    The Clerk. Mr. Barrasso?
    Senator Barrasso. No.
    The Clerk. Mr. Booker?
    Senator Boxer. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Boozman?
    Senator Boozman. No.
    The Clerk. Mrs. Boxer?
    Senator Boxer. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mrs. Capito?
    Senator Inhofe. No by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Cardin?
    Senator Cardin. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mr. Carper?
    Senator Boxer. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Crapo?
    Senator Crapo. No.
    The Clerk. Mrs. Fischer?
    Senator Fischer. No.
    The Clerk. Mrs. Gillibrand?
    Senator Boxer. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Markey?
    Senator Boxer. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Merkley?
    Senator Merkley. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mr. Rounds?
    Senator Rounds. No.
    The Clerk. Mr. Sanders?
    Senator Boxer. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Sessions?
    Senator Inhofe. No by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Sullivan?
    Senator Inhofe. No by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Vitter?
    Senator Inhofe. No by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Whitehouse?
    Senator Boxer. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Wicker?
    Senator Wicker. No.
    The Clerk. Mr. Chairman?
    Senator Inhofe. No.
    The Clerk. Mr. Chairman, the yeas are 9 and the nays are
11.
    Senator Inhofe. The amendment is not agreed to.
    Are there other amendments?
    Senator Boxer. Yes.
    Senator Inhofe. Senator Boxer?
    Senator Boxer. Thank you so much.
    I know everyone has things to do. I had nine amendments but
I am only offering three. I know they are painful for you, but
we will make it quick. I have Boxer Amendment No. 5.
    Senator Inhofe. Boxer Amendment No. 5, thank you.
    Senator Boxer. This amendment simply says the bill is null
and void if EPA or the Corps determines that implementation of
the bill will increase costs. That should be a good one for you
guys and gals. It would lengthen the time to obtain a permit or
perpetuate the lack of regulatory predictability and certainty.
    Stakeholders have waited far too long for EPA and the Corps
to address the confusion created by recent Supreme Court cases.
Now that the agencies have acted, we should not start the
process over as this bill requires.
    S. 1140 sends EPA and the Corps back to square one while
adding new and confusing terms that will have to be interpreted
and likely will be litigated. They will go straight to the
courthouse door. I can assure you of that. Environmentalists
have a record of winning, even in the U.S. Supreme Court as we
did on climate and many other things.
    S. 1140 could result in years of delay, confusion and
uncertainty. My amendment ensures that the new requirements of
this bill will not add to the problem by decreasing
predictability and making it more difficult and time consuming
to get a permit.
    If you support certainty and predictability, and if you do
not want to see more cost associated with this, I hope you will
support Boxer Amendment No. 5.
    [The text of Boxer Amendment No. 5 follows:]

    [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Boxer.
    I would observe the amendment gives the EPA and the Corps
the discretion to decide whether or not any of these three
standards are met. I believe that would render S. 1140
ineffective, in my opinion.
    Do others want to be heard? Senator Cardin?
    Senator Cardin. Mr. Chairman, I will be brief.
    I now have the drift of your concerns. I appreciate that.
You do not want to give the discretion to the Environmental
Protection Agency or the Army Corps to implement the Clean
Water Act.
    Therefore, I think it is incumbent upon us to write the
regulation and put it into law and for us to take on the
responsibility that would normally go with an agency. I do not
think we can do that, but I do not know how this committee can
act by the Majority in saying we are not going to give the
agency the ability to carry out our intent through its actions
because we do not believe they will do that.
    The Majority is saying that to us in a way that is
consistent with what we intend and yet we are not prepared to
enact a definitive statute as to how the law operates. You are
sending it back. To me, what you are doing is just delaying and
delaying and delaying. We have delayed it over a decade.
    You are not doing any favors to the stakeholders who have
to operate under the Clean Water Act. They need certainty. One
thing I have learned, when I talk to different business groups,
residents and people, they want certainty. They say, give us
the rules and we will operate under the rules.
    Yet, Mr. Chairman, you are saying you do not want to give
the ability of the agency to bring certainty and you are not
prepared to give the certainty by statute. That puts us in a
terrible position.
    I am just expressing my frustration and support of the
Boxer Amendment.
    Senator Inhofe. Let me respond by expressing my
frustration.
    It might be that you feel that the Administrator, the Corps
and the others are in a position to make these determinations
unilaterally without the input of someone who is elected. If
you talk to any of the farmers or ranchers in Oklahoma and you
will find they look to us, not the unelected bureaucrats, for
the interpretations. I would object to it.
    Does anyone else want to be heard?
    Senator Boxer. I would just close.
    Senator Inhofe. Yes, of course. Senator Boxer.
    Senator Boxer. I hear over and over again from Republican
friends that they do not want to have rules or laws that
increase costs. All we are saying is if there is an increase in
costs and if it is going to take more time to obtain a permit
or perpetuate the lack of regulatory predictability, the bill
is null and void.
    If you want to vote no against predictability and costs,
high costs, go ahead. I am sure you will, but just know that it
is kind of unusual to see my Republican friends voting against
something that clearly says, if it is going to increase costs,
it should be null and void.
    Let us vote and see. Maybe I will be shocked.
    Senator Inhofe. Senator Boxer, thank you very much.
    Senator Rounds. Mr. Chairman?
    Senator Inhofe. Yes, Senator Rounds?
    Senator Rounds. I think the Ranking Member has perhaps hit
on what is one of the key issues that many of us feel has to be
addressed. That is, in this particular case, this amendment
would actually ask the rulemakers to decide whether or not they
could void a law passed by Congress and allow them to recreate
the rules the way they want to interpret them without any
oversight from Congress.
    In other words, this would suggest the agency itself could
look at our legislation as passed and then, if it increases
costs, in their determination, they could then eliminate the
direction of the Congress of the United States.
    That is wrong. That is exactly getting to the heart of the
problem of what is going on with the bureaucracy in Washington
today. They are creating 3,500 more rules every single year. We
have a million rules on the books today. None of them have been
approved by the elected Members of Congress. They are put into
effect and there is no oversight today.
    Perhaps the way we fix it is in the future, this Congress
takes back the responsibility to actually make sure the rules
being put in place follow the guidelines and understanding and
interpretation of the Congress which passed the rule of the law
in the first place.
    I really do believe that is what this is all about.
    Senator Cardin. Would my colleague yield?
    Senator Rounds. I would.
    Senator Cardin. I appreciate your comments because I think
many of us share the responsibility we have in Congress to
oversee agencies. I take that very, very seriously.
    The challenge is that we do not have the same capacity to
do the scientific peer reviews that the agency does to use best
science, to do all that is implied in the Clean Water Act. That
was always the intent of Congress, that it be based upon
science, that there be scientific peer-reviewed data used and
cost analyses must be done. All that must be done. It is done
by the agency. We should be oversighting that. I agree with
you, but how do we proceed if they cannot get a regulation
done?
    Senator Rounds. Mr. Chairman, if I could, the Science
Advisory Board was designed to actually address the issues as
presented to them not only by the agency but also by this
committee. If you take a look at the GAO report, which was just
done and completed and passed out, it suggests very strongly
that they are not being asked for those analyses in terms of
what the costs are today.
    Not only should the agency take into account what the
Science Advisory Board could do if requested, but then it
should be shared with us as to whether they came up with the
analysis of what the actual costs are. I do not believe that is
occurring right now.
    I understand the need for good rules. I still think the
elected officials in this Country should have the ability to
look back, review and do the oversight on a regular and ongoing
basis of what those rules should look like when they are
implemented so that the laws put in place today, when they are
implemented correctly, follow the spirit and the intent of the
law itself.
    I do not believe the rules being put in place today
necessarily do that or that we have the system in place right
now that effectively oversees that implementation. Until such
time as that occurs, the only way we have to stop a bad law or
bad rule from going into effect is to literally pass an act by
Congress.
    That is what we are trying to do today, to replace and say,
we have seen the rules that you are putting in place, we see
what you are trying to do, and we disagree. If we disagree,
then we will rewrite a part of the law or amend the law so that
you cannot do what you are trying to do or what you
misunderstand our intent was in the first place.
    Senator Boxer. Mr. Chairman, may I be heard?
    Senator Inhofe. Senator Boxer.
    Senator Boxer. I really trust my friend and believe he is
here for the right reason, to do the right thing. But I just
want to say the way it works or the way it should work is when
Congress passes a law and it is overwhelmingly passed by
Republicans, that was 1972, the Clean Water Act, then it is
overwhelmingly reauthorized in 1987, and the agencies carried
out, in this case it is the Army Corps and the EPA carried out,
we do our oversight but we should not be tearing apart the
Clean Water Act.
    I will tell you this. The check and balance lies with the
courts. There is no doubt about it. We have seen business sue
on one hand, we have seen environmental groups sue and the
courts have looked at this.
    This bill rips the heart out of the rule and frankly, out
of the Clean Water Act. As Senator Cardin so beautifully stated
in his opening amendment, which we said let us at least restore
that. We could not even get that vote here.
    I want to say this. I hope you will vote for this. The fact
is EPA approval among the American people is about 70 percent.
Our approval is 19 percent. As much as my friend would like to
see Congress trump the EPA, the American people know in their
heart of hearts.
    They do not want this to be about politics or are we voting
for the polluters or are we voting for special interests. They
want the EPA and the Army Corps. Even when you look at the
polling done around this, the Corps overwhelmingly, on this
particular rule, they trust the Corps 72 percent and trust us
25 percent on this rule, and EPA well over 60 percent.
    My view is for all the talk about how wonderful we are, we
all have egos and know we are here for the right reasons and I
do not question that. We work hard and want to do the right
thing. The American people say, get out of the way here, have
the EPA and the Corps protect our waters.
    That does not mean everything they do is right but this
rips the heart out of the Clean Water Act. We should not be
doing that. If I could say, this is a low point for me
personally in this committee.
    I have seen us argue about a lot of things but I do not see
why we are doing this and I think it is sad. I would go so far
as to say I do not think this will ever become law. I do not
know anymore. I do not think it will, just judging from the
votes we are having here.
    In any event, I do not doubt my friend's intentions in any
way but I do think we are ripping the heart out of a bill that
is a landmark bill which has separated this Country from a lot
of other countries and has done a great job for 40 years. We
are messing with it and that is a sad day for the Environment
Committee.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Boxer.
    Let me take the Chair's prerogative. It has been stated
twice in the record in this meeting how overwhelmingly popular
the Corps of Engineers and the Administrator and this
Administration is.
    Let me remind you that 60 percent of the responses during
the comment period of this regulation were negative. I have
never seen it that high. That is very negative.
    The second thing is, you are right when you say we pass
laws and we have oversight. We have different Administrations
that come along and not always the same Administrator of the
EPA, not always the same Corps of Engineers. In fact, they
reflect the philosophy of the Administration.
    If you think we are all that unpopular and they are that
popular, I would invite you to come to Oklahoma. I would
suggest that Senator Fischer, who had a field hearing in
Nebraska, would probably agree with what I just said.
    Senator Barrasso. Mr. Chairman?
    Senator Inhofe. Senator Barrasso.
    Senator Barrasso. If I may add to the points you raised,
Senator Boxer appropriately talks about a law passed in 1972
and reauthorized in 1987. This is 2015. She talks about those
who support the EPA. Let me tell you what was in the Washington
Post on Monday, June 8.
    I would imagine most Americans who read this story would
not support this agency where the headline is Discipline at EPA
Lax, Watchdog Says. ``The Environmental Protection Agency is
creating a festering culture of complacency by dragging its
feet on actions against employee misconduct, the agency's
watchdog found, employees watching pornography on government
computers.'' This is under Gina McCarthy and there is a picture
of Gina McCarthy there.
    ``Employees watching pornography on government computers
and a senior executive who looked the other way while an
employee faked a timesheet and a senior employee who took
another paying job while on the Federal clock'' are some of the
examples the Inspector General cited last week.
    In the realm of fraud and abuse, the Inspector General
cited a need for better management oversight and prompt action
against employees guilty of misconduct. The EPA, they say, is
not using the tools it has to take action against employees who
break the rules.
    Investigators cited examples of wrongdoing that were no-
brainers for quick punishment, this is under Gina McCarthy, but
were handled instead by a laissez-faire approach. Two
employees, each earning $120,000 a year, watching pornography
on the job, were put on paid administrative leave for almost a
year before anyone tried to fire them.
    One case was discovered in November 2013, when Gina
McCarthy was Director of the EPA and another was in May 2014.
It took until March 2015 for the agency to move to fire them.
One employee retired. The other remains on paid leave while
appealing the decision. I do not believe the American people
aware of this would be supportive of an agency under the
direction of Gina McCarthy.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Barrasso.
    Senator Boxer. Mr. Chairman, since this is about my
amendment and it has gotten a little bit off track, I do not
know what someone watching pornography, which is outrageous,
has to do with that. A person should be fired, fined and maybe
jailed, I do not know the details, but what does that have to
do with making sure that when people turn on the tap water and
they have a drink, they do not get sick from some chemical
toxin in the water?
    We could talk about lots of other things in the news that
you would not want me to bring up. Let us not go there.
    I urge an aye vote. I want to have a roll call on this.
    Senator Inhofe. Boxer Amendment No. 5 is before us. There
has been a motion. Is there a second?
    Senator Cardin. Second.
    Senator Inhofe. A roll call has been requested. The Clerk
will call the roll.
    The Clerk. Mr. Barrasso?
    Senator Barrasso. No.
    The Clerk. Mr. Booker?
    Senator Boxer. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Boozman?
    Senator Boozman. No.
    The Clerk. Mrs. Boxer?
    Senator Boxer. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mrs. Capito?
    Senator Inhofe. No by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Cardin?
    Senator Cardin. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mr. Carper?
    Senator Boxer. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Crapo?
    Senator Crapo. No.
    The Clerk. Mrs. Fischer?
    Senator Fischer. No.
    The Clerk. Mrs. Gillibrand?
    Senator Boxer. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Markey?
    Senator Markey. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mr. Merkley?
    Senator Merkley. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mr. Rounds?
    Senator Rounds. No.
    The Clerk. Mr. Sanders?
    Senator Boxer. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Sessions?
    Senator Inhofe. No by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Sullivan?
    Senator Inhofe. No by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Vitter?
    Senator Inhofe. No by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Whitehouse?
    Senator Whitehouse. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mr. Wicker?
    Senator Wicker. No.
    The Clerk. Mr. Chairman?
    Senator Inhofe. No.
    The Clerk. The yeas are 9 and the nays are 11.
    Senator Inhofe. The motion is not carried.
    Are there other amendments?
    Senator Markey.
    Senator Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    I have an amendment at the desk, Markey Amendment No. 1.
    Senator Inhofe. Markey Amendment No. 1. Senator Markey.

          OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. EDWARD J. MARKEY,
          U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS

    Senator Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    This amendment intends to focus on public health, only the
public health aspect of what this bill could undermine. It
wants to say that there should not be a negative result with
regard to the drinking water that could ultimately wind up
poisoning people who drink it.
    The new EPA Clean Water Rule is about clarity, clarity for
developers, for farmers or city and town managers and
landowners. The rule was written to clarify ambiguities
resulting from two Supreme Court decisions on whether some
types of wetlands are considered to be waters of the United
States that are subject to the Clean Water Act.
    Since these types of wetlands supply most of the water that
flows through our rivers, this legal ambiguity means EPA might
be powerless to protect drinking water sources from pollution
dumped into wetlands.
    A staggering number of groups actually asked EPA to write
this rule to clarify the legal ambiguities. These groups
included steelworkers, manufacturers, road builders, retailers,
farmers, religious organizations, public health groups, real
eState developers, miners and oil and natural gas developers.
In 2013, these groups were joined by 30 Republican Senators who
sent a letter asking the EPA to write the rule.
    The EPA rule resolves uncertainty and controversy. It
improves consistent administration of the Act and it clarifies
the roles of State and Federal Government. More than 800,000
comments were sent in support of the Clean Water Rule. More
than 80 percent of the public and small business owners favor
the protections it provides.
    Where the Clean Water Rule seeks clarity, the bill we are
considering today would only muddy the waters by introducing
new ambiguities, ignoring science and creating new pollution
loopholes in the Clean Water Act. This bill's only solution to
pollution is confusion. Where EPA's Clean Water Rule will
reduce litigation, this bill would spawn lawsuits by inventing
undefinable, unscientific terms which would be impossible to
administer consistently.
    This bill would strip the protections from wetlands that
supply drinking water to 117 million Americans. The bill puts
drinking water at risk for 7 million people in my own State of
Massachusetts alone. It is this very issue that I am most
concerned about, the drinking water supply that millions of
Americans rely on to be clean and safe.
    My amendment is very simple. It merely states that the
provisions of this bill cannot go into effect if the EPA
Administrator determines that their implementation is likely to
increase the probability of exposure to toxic pollutants in
amounts that could adversely impact the health of people,
including infants, pregnant women and the elderly who need a
source of safe drinking water.
    It is as simple as that. It deals with infants, pregnant
women and the elderly and the health effects that could, in
fact, be created because of this bill which is being
propounded. If you want to keep the ``clean'' in the Clean
Water Act, then you should vote for my amendment.
    If you do not think the bill before us today is a threat to
drinking water, then you should also vote for my amendment. I
urge an aye vote.
    [The text of Markey Amendment No. 1 follows:]

  [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Markey.
    I would respond that as I have looked at this, it looks
like the EPA could vacate the bill by making a spurious
determination. I think after the comments made by Senator
Barrasso, I am not sure I want to have those individuals making
those spurious determinations, so I would oppose the amendment.
    Do others want to be heard? If not, Markey Amendment No. 1
is before us. Is there a motion?
    Senator Markey. I would ask for a roll call.
    Senator Inhofe. There is a motion and second and a roll
call has been requested. The Clerk will call the roll.
    The Clerk. Mr. Barrasso?
    Senator Barrasso. No.
    The Clerk. Mr. Booker?
    Senator Boxer. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Boozman?
    Senator Inhofe. No by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mrs. Boxer?
    Senator Boxer. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mrs. Capito?
    Senator Inhofe. No by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Cardin?
    Senator Cardin. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mr. Carper?
    Senator Boxer. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Crapo?
    Senator Crapo. No.
    The Clerk. Mrs. Fischer?
    Senator Fischer. No.
    The Clerk. Mrs. Gillibrand?
    Senator Boxer. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Markey?
    Senator Markey. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mr. Merkley?
    Senator Merkley. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mr. Rounds?
    Senator Rounds. No.
    The Clerk. Mr. Sanders?
    Senator Boxer. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Sessions?
    Senator Inhofe. No by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Sullivan?
    Senator Sullivan. No.
    The Clerk. Mr. Vitter?
    Senator Inhofe. No by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Whitehouse?
    Senator Whitehouse. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mr. Wicker?
    Senator Wicker. No.
    The Clerk. Mr. Chairman?
    Senator Inhofe. No.
    The Clerk. The yeas are 9 and the nays are 11.
    Senator Inhofe. The motion is defeated.
    Are there other amendments? Senator Boxer?
    Senator Boxer. I have my last amendment.
    I just want to say that it is very sad to paint the
employees of the EPA with the brush of one individual or even a
small group who were doing terrible things, just like it would
be bad to paint all of us because some leader in the Congress
also has a bad past.
    Let us not do that. It is wrong. It is just plain wrong. I
feel for those people who come to work every day whether it is
the Army Corps or the EPA and come there for the right reasons,
to do the right thing, to protect drinking water, to protect
the vulnerable populations.
    Let us not paint Gina McCarthy with this brush or anybody
else. It is a disgrace to do it. It is awful to do it. It is
wrong to do it.
    I call up my Amendment No. 6. The amendment says the bill
is null and void if EPA or the Corps, who I would remind
everyone have multiple times more approval among the people
than we do, if they determine that implementation of the bill
would increase pollution or increase costs incurred by the
States.
    Remember unfunded mandates? This bill could very well lead
to unfunded mandates. This bill could. Also, it could lead, and
will lead, if it does ever become law, I believe to increased
pollution because there are going to be so many streams, rivers
and bodies of water that are exempted that will then dump
pollution into drinking water and dump pollution into
recreational streams and rivers.
    Over 40 environmental law professors who write and teach
about the Clean Water Act have said S. 1140 would constitute a
massive weakening of the Clean Water Act. Let us be clear what
this is. You can hide behind attacks on the EPA, attacks on the
Army Corps all you want but what you are doing is a backdoor
repeal of the Clean Water Act with huge carveouts. This is what
they write, that it could be argued to exclude vast swaths of
currently protected water.
    The bill will dramatically narrow the scope of the Clean
Water Act, allowing uncontrolled pollution and placing an
extraordinary burden on our States because EPA will be absent,
the Corps will be absent.
    Trust me, I have been in local government. When someone
gets sick, they knock on your door and that is your problem and
you will not be able to call on the EPA or the Army Corps to
help because they will be excluded from this.
    This amendment, my amendment, my last one, ensures that the
bill will not undermine the basic goals of protections of the
Clean Water Act which prevent pollution. The amendment makes
sure that the bill will not place all of the burden for
protecting our waterways on the States and require them to
shoulder the costs.
    I would hope we would have at least one or two people from
the other side, who constantly lecture us about how we do not
want to put more costs and burdens on the States, would vote
for this.
    If you oppose increasing pollution in our Nation's
waterways and if you oppose putting greater burdens on the
States, I urge a yes vote on this amendment. I would move it.
    [The text of Boxer Amendment No. 6 follows:]

    [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]



    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Boxer.
    I would only respond the same as I did to the last one,
that the EPA could vacate the bill by making a spurious
decision and I would oppose this amendment.
    Do others want to be heard? Senator Rounds.
    Senator Rounds. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Once again, I think we have come down to the heart of what
many of us see as one of the major problems with the way the
Federal regulatory process works today. Not only would this
amendment suggest that the EPA could overturn a congressionally
determined law by their own determination but in this
particular case, it even goes farther in that it suggests that
we would be addressing surface waters of the individual States.
    Once again, we may think that being elected as Members of
Congress we should make all of the determinations for every
level of government. I think it is about time that we decide
that if we wanted to be school board members or if we want to
dictate what happens in our local schools, we ought to be on
the school board.
    At the same time, if we want to make determinations about
surface waters in the States, that would be back at the
legislative level in the States. Not all good advice from us is
necessarily good law that should be dumped back on the local
levels.
    With all due respect to the Ranking Member, I really think
there are responsible individuals at the State level just like
there are responsible individuals at the Federal level. With
Congress suggesting that we could allow a Federal bureaucracy
or an administrator to make a determination as to our intent
and then to overturn a law passed by this Congress goes to the
very heart of what is wrong with Washington, DC. today.
    I really think this is the heart of the problem that we
have when we talk about the Environmental Protection Agency and
their impact at the local level where it appears as though we
think we at the Federal level know everything there is to know
about what is going on at the State level and that we should
assert the responsibilities which rightly belong to the States
where there are good people who care just as much about quality
water as we do.
    Senator Inhofe. Senator Cardin?
    Senator Cardin. First of all, I think Senator Rounds raises
many very important points but I think there is some
fundamental misunderstanding as to what our appropriate role
should be, what a Federal agency's appropriate role should be,
and how we should interact with the States.
    I have heard complaints that there have been too many
regulations issued and the number of regulations. Congress
passes laws. They are well intended. We want clean water. We
want clean air. That was not controversial among the Democrats
and Republicans because the public understands that clean water
and clean air is not controlled by one State, that you need to
have a Federal policy on how you are going to get clean water.
    The water that is going to end up in the tap when I turn it
on in Baltimore may very well have come through West Virginia.
They understand that we have to deal with the water of the
Nation. That is why we passed the Clean Water Act.
    We are not scientists, we are not capable of developing all
of the implementing regulations, so we asked the agency to do
that. We give them certain direction on how that is going to be
done. We are pretty clear about that and the type of reviews
they have to go through, including scientific reviews, costs
analyses, and complying with what Congress sets up as the
goals. We have already gone through some of that.
    Senator Boxer's amendment is pretty clear in what it says.
It says ``cause or contribute to the impairment of surface or
coastal waters of the States.'' They have to make that
determination.
    We have seen court decisions when the agencies go beyond
what Congress says they can do. We have court oversight and we
should have congressional oversight. I agree with Senator
Rounds.
    I think one of the most important responsibilities of this
committee and every committee of Congress is to oversight the
laws on the books rather than always looking to create new
laws. I think that is very important. If we have to change or
eliminate laws, we need to do that. I agree with you on that.
That is our responsibility.
    However, do not say we are not going to let agencies carry
out their responsibilities because they are not complying with
the will of Congress. If we do not think we are clear about
what we say, let us say it clearer. We cannot be the
implementing agency.
    Part of what I find frustrating is the fact there happens
to be a Democrat sitting in the White House. I had to say that
because I think that is part of the problem we are confronting
today, that we do not believe an agency will carry out what I,
as an individual member believe they should, even though the
law says something different than what I believe as an
individual member of the Senate.
    I am not questioning anyone's motives. Believe me, I am
not. The collective wisdom of the Congress of the United States
said we want clean water. It is up to the Environmental
Protection Agency and the Army Corps to carry out those
directives.
    Yes, we can be clearer in those directions and we should be
clearer. We can have the agency here for oversight hearings to
make sure they are carrying out what we believe the intent
should be.
    Members of the committee, we have been debating this issue
for over a decade under both Democratic and Republican
Administrations. If this bill becomes law, we are back to the
drawing board and we have the same ambiguity, the same case by
case determinations which our stakeholders do not want because
we have not been able to figure out how Congress needs to
interact with the agency on a review. Do not blame the agency,
it is our responsibility.
    The Boxer Amendment is a directive to what they must do.
They cannot just say we are going to overturn the rules of
Congress. They have to comply with the language we put in the
statute or anyone can take them to court, as they have taken
them to court. They have taken them to the Supreme Court of the
United States with, by the way, decisions that had additional
ambiguity that only Congress can clarify.
    Yet we are not trying to clarify it and now we are blocking
the Administration from trying to give some clarity to the
stakeholders and protect what Congress said is the mandate of
clean water for the United States.
    I understand Senator Rounds' frustration. We are all
frustrated by this. I hope together this committee can carry
out its most fundamental responsibility of oversight. That is
what we need to do.
    You are going to have my support and I think all of us want
to make sure that the agency is carrying out what Congress
said, not what I would like Congress to have said, but what
Congress has said and carry it out in the most cost effective
way. On that, we would be together.
    In the meantime, I am afraid if this bill became law
without some of the amendments we have offered, what we are
doing is basically failing to carry out our responsibility in
Congress.
    Senator Boxer. Mr. Chairman?
    Senator Inhofe. Senator Boxer.
    Senator Boxer. Thank you.
    I urge an aye vote but I really want to say how important I
think this debate has been. It has been done with respect for
each other.
    I hope anyone who has watched this understands how
breathtakingly different it is now than it used to be when it
comes to environmental protection. I will prove it by putting a
letter in the record in a minute.
    We have always felt, all through history until this moment,
that when it comes to our drinking water, Republicans and
Democrats have agreed that no matter where you live, your child
should have safe drinking water and your elderly grandmother
should have it. Everybody should have it. It is an American
value.
    Now, all of a sudden, wait a minute, I hear voices here
which are sincere. We do not know everything. Of course, we do
not know everything but I know one thing. I think a child in
Arkansas, Alaska, California, Maryland or any one of our States
deserves to be protected.
    I would unanimous consent to place in the record this
incredible letter. I do not know how my staff found it but they
did. It is from the very first and the fifth Administrator of
the EPA under both Nixon and Reagan. Ronald Reagan, I would say
is the hero of the Republicans. I always hear him being praised
up and down.
    Listen to this. This is Ruckelshaus who wrote this in 2007.
``Broad Clean Water Act jurisdiction is not only necessary to
clean up the Nation's waters, it is necessary to ensure that
the responsibility for maintaining and restoring clean water is
shared equitably throughout the watershed and from State to
State.
    ``In passing the Clean Water Act, Congress recognized that
the State-by-State approach to water pollution control had
failed and that it was necessary to maintain a Federal floor
for water pollution control to ensure that discharges in one
State do not jeopardize water quality in another.''
    I would like to put that in the record.
    Senator Inhofe. Without objection.
    [The referenced information follows:]

    [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Boxer. I will conclude with this point.
    All this talk about the States know better. I love my
Governor and I love my State and they are great. We work
together on things. They want a strong highway bill. There my
Chairman agrees, we work hand and glove.
    We have a Federal Highway Trust Fund and there are some in
the Republican Party who want to do devolution and have no role
for the Federal Government. I hope we do not have it on this
committee. We will find out when we bring forward our bill.
    Look at Texas. They are always talking about Texas is
alone, we do not need anyone else. The minute they had the
floods, President Obama, please declare an emergency. We have
to work together. There have to be values.
    We have one Department of Defense. There are reasons.
Dwight Eisenhower, another great man, said that you cannot have
defense if you do not have a system of highways. Here we have
the first EPA Administrator who was there again later, a proud
Republican, saying State-by-State approach to water quality has
failed.
    It is a breathtaking change in the parties. I am shocked
about it. I never cease to be shocked about it but it is the
evolution of the parties. I am sad about it because I think the
people will suffer and people will be hurt if this legislation
were to pass because as I said, so many waterways would be
exempted that we would have more people getting sick.
    I do not think this will pass. I hope the American people
will engage.
    By the way, on the comments, there are different ways to
look at the comments. Some ways to look at the comments is the
way my friend portrayed it. Others are that more than 80
percent of the comments were positive on the rule.
    Be that as it may, this is our turn to be heard. I think we
all have been heard. I hope we will have an aye vote for this
so we can take a stand against more State costs and a stand to
protect the people from pollution.
    Senator Inhofe. Senator Sullivan, I am going to ask a favor
of you because I am getting a little concerned that we are
getting down to the 11 quorum that we have to have to pass
this. After we pass the bill and before we do the technical,
which has to be done also, at that point, I would like to
recognize you because I know of something you want to say that
is pertinent to this and get some results from the counsel. Is
that acceptable with you?
    Senator Sullivan. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
    Senator Inhofe. It would be right after the vote. We will
still be in session.
    Senator Sullivan. Thank you.
    Senator Boxer. I move the amendment.
    Senator Inhofe. Before you move the amendment, do others
want to be heard?
    Senator Sullivan. I would like to respond. We can vote now.
    Senator Inhofe. You will get a chance to do that.
    First of all, on Boxer Amendment No. 6, is there a motion?
    Senator Boxer. Move the amendment.
    Senator Inhofe. Is there a second?
    Senator Cardin. Second.
    Senator Boxer. Request a roll call.
    Senator Inhofe. A roll call has been requested. The Clerk
will call the roll.
    The Clerk. Mr. Barrasso?
    Senator Barrasso. No.
    The Clerk. Mr. Booker?
    Senator Boxer. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Boozman?
    Senator Boozman. No.
    The Clerk. Mrs. Boxer?
    Senator Boxer. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mrs. Capito?
    Senator Inhofe. No by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Cardin?
    Senator Cardin. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mr. Carper?
    Senator Boxer. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Crapo?
    Senator Inhofe. No by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mrs. Fischer?
    Senator Fischer. No.
    The Clerk. Mrs. Gillibrand?
    Senator Boxer. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Markey?
    Senator Markey. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mr. Merkley?
    Senator Merkley. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mr. Rounds?
    Senator Rounds. No.
    The Clerk. Mr. Sanders?
    Senator Boxer. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Sessions?
    Senator Inhofe. No by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Sullivan?
    Senator Sullivan. No.
    The Clerk. Mr. Vitter?
    Senator Inhofe. No by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Whitehouse?
    Senator Whitehouse. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mr. Wicker?
    Senator Wicker. No.
    The Clerk. Mr. Chairman?
    Senator Inhofe. No.
    The Clerk. The yeas are 9 and the nays are 11.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you. The amendment is not agreed to.
    Seeing no further members wishing to seek recognition to
offer amendments, I move to accept the Manager's Amendment to
S. 1140 and report the legislation to the Senate. Is there a
second?
    Senator Wicker. Second.
    Senator Inhofe. We will request a roll call. The Clerk will
call the roll.
    The Clerk. Mr. Barrasso?
    Senator Barrasso. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mr. Booker?
    Senator Boxer. No by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Boozman?
    Senator Boozman. Yes.
    The Clerk. Mrs. Boxer?
    Senator Boxer. No.
    The Clerk. Mrs. Capito?
    Senator Inhofe. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Cardin?
    Senator Cardin. No.
    The Clerk. Mr. Carper?
    Senator Boxer. No by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Crapo?
    Senator Inhofe. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mrs. Fischer?
    Senator Fischer. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mrs. Gillibrand?
    Senator Boxer. No by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Markey?
    Senator Markey. No.
    The Clerk. Mr. Merkley?
    Senator Merkley. No.
    The Clerk. Mr. Rounds?
    Senator Rounds. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mr. Sanders?
    Senator Boxer. No by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Sessions?
    Senator Inhofe. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Sullivan?
    Senator Sullivan. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mr. Vitter?
    Senator Inhofe. Aye by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Whitehouse?
    Senator Boxer. No by proxy.
    The Clerk. Mr. Wicker?
    Senator Wicker. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mr. Chairman?
    Senator Inhofe. Aye.
    The Clerk. Mr. Chairman, the yeas are 11 and the nays are
9.
    Senator Inhofe. The ayes have it and the legislation is
favorably reported to the Senate. Before we do our motion on
the technical corrections, I would like to recognize Senator
Sullivan.
    Senator Sullivan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    I have a quick question for counsel. Under Section 4(b)(3)
of the introduced bill, it states that the terms ``waters of
the United States'' under the Clean Water Act should not
include ``water that is located below the surface of the land
including soil and groundwater.''
    Does this reference to soil and water include water in
permafrost and water in the saturated soils that lie above
permafrost?
    Staff. Yes, Senator, it does.
    Senator Sullivan. Thank you. Thank you for that
clarification.
    Mr. Chairman, if it is OK, I just wanted to respond very
briefly. I think this has been a very good debate as Senator
Boxer mentioned. I think there are a number of us, Senator
Cardin mentioned there is some frustration, and I would agree
with that.
    We all certainly want clean water. My city in Anchorage
gets awards almost every year for having some of the cleanest,
if not the cleanest water, in the United States. It is in large
measure due to the local and State authorities who make it that
way.
    We also want to protect the Constitution and the separation
of powers and Federal overreach. One of the frustrations we
have had that has been the motivation behind this bill, again I
agree with Senator Boxer, there are many great employees at the
EPA but they have been acting in a way that exceeds their
authority. This is not just hypothetical.
    There was a lawsuit last year, Utility Air Regulator Group
v. EPA, where the Supreme Court said something in very similar
situation, the EPA issued a regulation under the Clean Air Act.
Many opposed that. I was Attorney General of the State of
Alaska and opposed that. They said the EPA did not have the
authority to do that, it was expanding its jurisdiction.
    The Supreme Court said the only body that can expand the
EPA's jurisdiction is this body. That is what they are trying
to do with their ``waters of the U.S.'' reg, expand their
jurisdiction. No one, I believe on either side of the aisle,
thinks the EPA has the authority to expand its own
jurisdiction. That is the crux of the issue.
    Let me give you one sense on the frustration of oversight.
The EPA Administrator has sat before this committee a number of
times. I have asked her a simple question, can you provide the
legal basis, the legal opinion under the Clean Water Act that
gives you the justification for this rule? It is simple. That
is oversight. She has never responded, never responded.
    When you get blown off like that in terms of oversight, I
think it is exactly the prerogative of the Congress to clarify
what the law is and say where and when they do not have the
authority. That is why I think this is a very important bill.
    They need to respond to oversight. When they do not do it,
we need to act. In this case, they will not even provide the
Congress, this committee, an opinion that says here is our
authority under the Clean Water Act to issue this regulation,
to issue this rule. They have never responded. That is
outrageous. She needs to respond to this committee.
    It is a simple request. It is oversight. It is us doing our
job. They need to do their job by responding.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Senator Boxer. Mr. Chairman?
    Senator Inhofe. Senator Boxer.
    Senator Boxer. I agree that we have a right to have our
questions answered. I will work with you on that, absolutely.
There is no doubt in my mind.
    I would urge you to take a look at all the court cases in
totality that the EPA has won and lost. I would argue if you
look at the Supreme Court, they have mostly won. I would argue
when environmental groups push the EPA, because they are not
doing enough, the environmental groups win.
    I think it is worthwhile to take a look at these cases. I
would say again, the honesty here in this committee today, I
commend. I really do. We heard today the true heart and soul of
members on both sides. It is an unbelievable change. The people
have to understand it.
    I will continue as long as I am sitting here and it will be
next to my Chairman until I go on to do other work, a lot of it
will probably be a continuation of the work I have done, but I
will continue to point out where I think we can come together
and not be so separated on this issue of protecting our people.
    None of us wants a child to get sick. But the bottom line,
let us recognize what you say in the name of deregulation and
our authority over their authority, at the end of the day, what
are we doing? Are we making our people safer or are we not?
    To me that is the reason I am here, to make sure people are
protected. This is totally different, whether it is taking the
fight to ISIS, which I want to do, not with our combat boots on
the ground I might add, but taking the fight to them and also
making sure that when our kids drink the water, they are safe
or when they swim.
    I read recently, where was it, in Ohio where that child got
sick in the last couple of years, got sick swimming because the
waters had gotten so warm there were all kinds of toxins there
that were not usually there. I think it was Lake Havasu. Am I
right? Yes.
    What we do here regardless if it is at a peak that no one
answered our letter, and I agree that is wrong, or at a peak
because we are more important than the EPA and more important
than the Corps and all that, OK.
    To me the most important thing is that our people are
protected. Today, we took a giant step backward on that front,
a giant step. I do not care what the bill is called. We have a
tendency here of giving these bills beautiful names. What is
this one called, the Federal Water Quality Protection Act? It
is not about that.
    Let us look past the title. We have beautiful titles for
bills but they are really not beautiful bills.
    Senator Cardin. Mr. Chairman?
    Senator Inhofe. Just a minute, Senator Cardin.
    Let me respond to that first and then we have one member
who has not been here who may want to be heard. Do you want to
be heard? She does not.
    Let me repeat. We have said many, many times, the
Republicans want clean water, we want our kids to drink clean
water and we are going to be doing all we can.
    The Republican Party and the parties have not really
changed. You talked about Ruckelshaus. It happened during that
time there were EPA Administrators and others who were not
abusing people on the outside. That is not true today. It is
our job in oversight to be responsible to their needs.
    Without objection, I am going to enter into the record the
Monday, June 8 Washington Times referred to by Senator
Barrasso.
    [The referenced information was not received at time of
print.]
    Senator Inhofe. Do others want to be heard?
    Senator Boxer. Mr. Chairman, may I correct myself? I made a
mistake. I have to correct the name of the lake. Is that OK?
    Senator Inhofe. Sure.
    Senator Boxer. Lake Havasu is in Arizona. On Trip Advisor,
it says ``Visitors to Lake Havasu beaches not told of killer
parasite in the lake.'' I was wrong on the State. There was an
incident in Ohio.
    My point is all of what we do really does have implications
for people.
    Senator Cardin. Mr. Chairman, very quickly, I want to
respond to Senator Sullivan's point because I agree with
Senator Boxer. There should be no disagreement on our committee
that any reasonable request be honored by any member of our
committee and certainly by our committee for information. I
certainly support that.
    I wanted to point out on the constitutional issues that
there are three branches of government, not two, not just the
Executive and the Congress. We also have the Judicial Branch.
    In regard to these rules, we were operating, I think, with
a clear understanding prior to the Swank and Rapanos decisions
of the Supreme Court. It was the Rapanos decisions that told
Congress the agency had to clarify the waters of the U.S. That
threw in the uncertainty which is the Supreme Court interprets
the laws.
    Either Congress or the agencies had to respond to the
Rapanos decision and that is what we have been wrestling with
ever since that Supreme Court decision came down. I thought I
would just point that out. There are not just two branches of
government. There are three branches of government involved in
us trying to clarify the waters of the U.S.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you for that clarification.
    I ask unanimous consent that staff have the authority to
make technical and conforming changes to the measure approved
today. Without objection, so ordered.
    We are adjourned.
    [Whereupon, at 11:04 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

                                 [all]
