[Senate Hearing 114-363]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]


                                                        S. Hrg. 114-363

   EXAMINING PATHWAYS TOWARD COMPLIANCE OF THE NATIONAL AMBIENT AIR
QUALITY STANDARD FOR GROUND-LEVEL OZONE: LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON S. 2882
                              AND S. 2072

=======================================================================

                                HEARING

                               BEFORE THE

                       SUBCOMMITTEE ON CLEAN AIR
                           AND NUCLEAR SAFETY

                                 OF THE

                              COMMITTEE ON
                      ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
                          UNITED STATES SENATE

                    ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

                             SECOND SESSION

                               __________

                             JUNE 22, 2016

                               __________

  Printed for the use of the Committee on Environment and Public Works


  [GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


       Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys


                               ___________


                   U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
21-264 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2016

________________________________________________________________________________________

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,

http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer
Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-
free).
E-mail, gpo@custhelp.com.


               COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS

                    ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS
                             SECOND SESSION

                  JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma, Chairman
DAVID VITTER, Louisiana              BARBARA BOXER, California
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming               THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho                    BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas               SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
JEFF SESSIONS, Alabama               JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi            KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND, New York
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska                CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota            EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska

                 Ryan Jackson, Majority Staff Director
               Bettina Poirier, Democratic Staff Director


                             ----------

              Subcommittee on Clean Air and Nuclear Safety

             SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia, Chairman
DAVID VITTER, Louisiana              THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming               BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho                    BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
JEFF SESSIONS, Alabama               SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi            JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska                EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma (ex        BARBARA BOXER, California (ex
    officio)                             officio)


                            C O N T E N T S

                              ----------
                                                                   Page

                             JUNE 22, 2016
                           OPENING STATEMENTS

Capito, Hon. Shelley Moore, U.S. Senator from the State of West
  Virginia.......................................................     1
Hatch, Hon. Orrin G., U.S. Senator from the State of Utah,
  prepared statement.............................................     3
Manchin, Hon. Joe, U.S. Senator from the State of West Virginia,
  prepared statement.............................................     4
Carper, Hon. Thomas R., U.S. Senator from the State of Delaware..    22
Flake, Hon. Jeff, U.S. Senator from the State of Arizona.........   106

                               WITNESSES

Karperos, Kurt, P.E., Deputy Executive Officer, California Air
  Resources Board................................................    25
    Prepared statement...........................................    27
Rice, Mary B., M.D., Vice-Chair, American Thoracic Society
  Environmental Health Policy Committee, and Assistant Professor
  of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard
  Medical School BIDMC...........................................    62
    Prepared statement...........................................    64
Chesley, Andrew T., Executive Director, San Joaquin Council of
  Governments, Stockton, California..............................    74
    Prepared statement...........................................    77
Raymond, Mark, Uintah County Commissioner and Chair, Uintah
  County, Utah...................................................    82
    Prepared statement...........................................    84
Hamer, Glenn, President and CEO, Arizona Chamber of Commerce and
  Industry.......................................................    89
    Prepared statement...........................................    91

                          ADDITIONAL MATERIAL

Statement on Examining Pathways Toward Compliance for the
  National Ambient Air Quality Standard for Ground-Level Ozone:
  Legislative Hearing on S. 2882 and S. 2072.....................   123


   EXAMINING PATHWAYS TOWARD COMPLIANCE OF THE NATIONAL AMBIENT AIR
QUALITY STANDARD FOR GROUND-LEVEL OZONE: LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON S. 2882
                              AND S. 2072

                              ----------


                        WEDNESDAY, JUNE 22, 2016

                               U.S. Senate,
         Committee on Environment and Public Works,
              Subcommittee on Clean Air and Nuclear Safety,
                                                    Washington, DC.
    The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:30 p.m. in room
406, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Shelley Moore Capito
(chairwoman of the subcommittee) presiding.
    Present: Senators Capito, Carper, Fischer, Inhofe, Cardin,
and Whitehouse.
    Also present: Senator Flake.

        OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO,
          U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF WEST VIRGINIA

    Senator Capito. Thank you all for being here. I would like
to start the committee hearing on the ozone standard bill of
the Clean Air and Nuclear Safety Subcommittee ozone hearing.
    I thank all the folks who are here to testify for their
knowledge and for their willingness to come.
    So I am going to take 5 minutes and make an opening
statement, and then I will turn to the Ranking Member.
    And the Chairman of the full committee, I would like to
thank you for being here with us as well.
    So today we are here to discuss the pathways to compliance
for the National Ambient Air Quality Standards for ground-level
ozone and to examine two pieces of legislation that offer real
solutions to improve EPA's ozone standard regulations, which
are, in my view, overly complicated and duplicative. One of
these bills is my Ozone Standards Implementation Act of 2016,
which is co-sponsored by Senator Flake from Arizona and Senator
Manchin from West Virginia, and several of my Republican
colleagues, including Chairman Inhofe.
    Last October EPA announced a stricter ozone standard,
dropping the acceptable amount of ozone to 70 parts per billion
from 75 parts per billion. Currently, there are dozens of
counties--I was speaking with Mr. Hamer there earlier about
this--with the 2008 ozone standard, showing us that EPA has yet
to fully implement the previous standard. Moreover, EPA
drastically missed its implementation deadlines and failed to
designate non-attainment areas under the 2008 standard until
May 2012.
    My home State of West Virginia was one of a dozen States to
formally oppose the rule. Instead of encouraging States and
stakeholders by showing pathways toward compliance for the 2008
standard, EPA decided to double down and enable an even tougher
standard before all areas had a chance to get into compliance.
    Proponents of the new standard may claim that it allows for
cleaner air for our citizens, but that is exactly what we are
getting under the previous 2008 standard. The EPA itself
reported that the Nation's air quality has improved
dramatically over the past several decades. Regulated emissions
from coal-fired power plants have been reduced 60 percent over
the last 30 years. And these reductions have been accomplished
while electricity from coal has increased approximately 140
percent.
    If the EPA would merely allow the previous 2008 standard to
be fully implemented, emissions would be cut by 36 percent. Yet
the Administration has decided to continue its assault on
baseload power sources while disregarding the economic impacts
of newer and harsher regulations.
    To address these issues today, we will examine two bills
that would protect economic growth and job creation while
ensuring air quality continues to improve. These are both
bipartisan bills and have been endorsed by over 200 trade
organizations representing sectors and jobs across the economy,
from manufacturing to energy, construction, transportation,
railroads, iron and steel, consumer products, textiles, pulp
and paper, mining and agriculture, and the chambers of
commerce.
    In S. 2882, the bill I introduced, No. 1, it ensures that
EPA issues timely implementation regulations. Remember
previously in my statement I talked about how long it took for
EPA to do this previously. It ensures that for certain ozone
non-attainment areas States are not required to include
economically unfeasible measures in their plans. Charges that
the EPA's mandatory review of NAAQS from 5 to 10 years to
combat rushed timelines and directs the EPA to submit a report
to Congress regarding the impacts of emissions from foreign
countries on NAAQS compliance.
    S. 2072 is sponsored by Senators Hatch and McCaskill, which
would require the EPA to set up an early action compact program
that allows counties to take preemptive measures to avoid a
non-attainment designation.
    So, without objection, I would like to enter the following
documents into the record: Senator Hatch's statement for the
record, Senator Manchin's statement for the record, a letter of
support from the Utah Department of Environmental Quality, a
letter of support from over 200 impacted industries from across
the country, a letter of support from 60 conservative
organizations, and a letter of support from the Industrial
Energy Consumers of America. So I have Senator Manchin's
statement here, and I will submit for the record without
objection.
    [The referenced information follows:]

                   Statement of Hon. Orrin G. Hatch,
                  U.S. Senator from the State of Utah

    Chairman Capito, today I wish to speak about ozone and
current Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) ozone standards.
    Ozone is a naturally occurring phenomenon. In many ways,
ozone is good for our planet because it shields us from the
sun's harmful ultraviolet rays. On the other hand, scientists
tend to agree that extreme concentrations of ozone, especially
when it hovers over cities, can have adverse health effects on
human populations. Because of this, the EPA regulates ozone
levels across the country under the authority of the Clean Air
Act.
    Now I understand the importance of keeping America's air
clean, especially if too much ozone presents a public health
risk. But if we are going to alter Federal ozone standards,
revisions should be both based on science and mindful of
economic impacts. Regrettably, EPA's recently released and
updated National Ambient Air Quality Standards fail to meet
these two criteria.
    While EPA's revisions may be well intended, the agency
misses several critical points. For example, in a rush to
create national standards, EPA glossed over regional
environmental variables. EPA chose to simply establish a
blanket, nationwide standard for permissible atmospheric ozone,
and in doing so they ignored the science concerning naturally
occurring ozone--or what many call ``background'' or
``ambient'' ozone, which varies from region to region.
    Unfortunately, for many areas across the West, this new
standard is either at or near background ozone levels. As a
result, EPA's new standard will disproportionately impact many
Western communities. Even before the updated standard, if you
happened to live in an area with high levels of ambient ozone
you were likely already at risk of being designated as living
in a ``non-attainment'' area. Now that the standard has become
more stringent, it is likely to push these areas over the edge.
And to be clear, a non-attainment designation can result in
significant and detrimental economic consequences for a
community.
    For these reasons, while I recognize the importance of
protecting our environment and monitoring air quality, I
question the practicality of EPA's recently updated standards.
In my view, as a matter of responsible governance, we need to
push back against these types of one-size-fits-all Federal
mandates that inadequately account for regional dynamics. In
this case, especially due to the high potential for economic
ramifications, ozone regulations need to be based on sound
science and must consider regional ozone levels that occur
regardless of human contribution.
    Chairman Capito, at a time when Americans across the
country are struggling to regain their footing and make ends
meet, our Federal Government should be facilitating job
creation and economic expansion, not stifling these efforts.
Without a doubt, we should be exploring ways to improve our
environment, but I believe that economic and environmental
progress are not mutually exclusive. The choice between jobs
and the environment does not have to be a zero-sum game. With
this in mind, I have introduced legislation, S. 2072 alongside
my colleague and friend, Senator Claire McCaskill. Our bill
would direct the EPA to implement a program allowing
communities to enter into voluntary, cooperative agreements
with the EPA to craft local solutions that improve air quality
in compliance with Federal standards.
    Specifically, existing law is failing to energize efforts
to improve air quality because it does not permit the EPA to
give at-risk communities any ``early action'' credit for
environmentally beneficial actions taken before a non-
attainment designation. Instead, the EPA can only give credit
for improvements that are made after a designation is declared
and the damage is already done. Early action cooperative
agreements help address this problem, and they have a strong
precedent and a proven track record.
    As background, in 2002 the EPA initiated a plan similar to
the one outlined in S. 2072, called the Early Action Compact
Program (the Program), which allowed areas struggling to comply
with Federal standards to enter into an agreement with the EPA.
The goals of these agreements were to improve air quality, to
avoid a non-attainment designation during implementation, and
to provide credits for investments made as part of the compact.
Under the Program, 29 areas from over 10 States entered into
agreements by December 2002. Of those areas, 14 successfully
deferred non-attainment status and 15 achieved attainment.
Ultimately, only one area--Denver, Colorado--failed to complete
the Program. The Program's ability to provide flexibility
provided communities with the tools they needed to control
emissions more efficiently. Most importantly, the Program
achieved success in a way that didn't come at the cost of jobs
and the economy.
    Unfortunately, far left environmental activists--more
interested in blocking industry than preserving our
environment--sued the EPA. By 2007 the EPA scrapped the Program
due to litigation which argued that there was no authority
under the Clean Air Act for the program. Thus, after 2007, the
Program ended.
    The legislation I introduced with Senator McCaskill will
give clear authorization and direct the EPA to implement a
program similar to the program of the early 2000s. Our bill
will allow vulnerable areas across the country to again have
the option of taking early action at the local level where it
is most effective. This way, our communities can actually
improve air quality and avoid a non-attainment designation and
the negative economic consequences that come with it. If
enacted, the EPA will be granted clear authority to give early
action credit to at-risk areas across the country looking for
help in complying with Federal standards. In turn, communities
will be able to propose local, proactive solutions, in
voluntary cooperation with the EPA, to improve air quality
without risk.
    To conclude, Chairman Capito, compromise isn't a bad word.
You understand that improving good governance, the economy, and
the environment is not a zero-sum game. Empowering our cities
and counties with tools to implement locally crafted solutions
to our problems will always deliver better results than big,
one-size-fits-all Federal mandates, standards, and rules
crafted by unelected bureaucrats in Washington.

                    Statement of Hon. Joe Manchin,
              U.S. Senator from the State of West Virginia

    I want to thank Chairman Capito, Ranking Member Carper and
the subcommittee for holding this hearing on S. 2882--the Ozone
Standards Implementation Act of 2016.
    Senator Capito's leadership on this issue is to be
commended, and I am delighted to be a co-sponsor with her on
this legislation. Her continued work on this issue is of
critical importance to our Nation, and I fully support her
efforts.
    Our Nation has made great strides in achieving cleaner air.
Since 1980 ozone levels have dropped 33 percent--this trend
will continue as States implement the 2008 ozone standard and
additional counties reach attainment. But States need time to
catch up.
    As the committee is aware, I previously sponsored
legislation with Senator Thune regarding the Environmental
Protection Agency's 2015 national ambient air quality standards
(NAAQS) for ozone. That bill--the Clean Air, Strong Economies
Act--would have prevented the EPA from finalizing a new rule
lowering the standard for ozone causing emissions unless and
until 85 percent of non-attainment counties were in compliance
with the 2008 standard.
    Despite our efforts, the EPA moved forward with
promulgating a new standard that imposes overlapping and
burdensome new schedules on States and has the potential to
cause both immediate and long-term economic harm across our
Nation. In fact, the EPA estimates that the new 70 parts per
billion standard will increase the number of counties impacted
from 217 counties to 958 counties.
    That represents nearly one-third of the Nation, which will
experience negative effects on job growth and development.
Businesses will have to install expensive control technology
and acquire a PSD permit in order to build or expand operations
and create jobs in these counties. Yet, the EPA itself
estimates that almost the entire Nation will be in compliance
with the 2008 standard by 2025 using current methods.
    The new EPA standard will hit our manufacturing community
hard at a time when we are desperately in need of economic
development in many areas of the country, including Appalachia.
    S. 2882 is a common sense measure that allows for
thoughtful implementation of ozone standards and reforms the
law to improve how and when the national ambient air quality
standards (NAAQS) are reviewed and updated.
    Specifically, this bill will ease the negative effects of
the new standard by extending compliance deadlines and
facilitating implementation of the rule in a pragmatic,
thoughtful way. It allows States to catch up and prevent undue
economic harm.
    The bill also changes the required review period for NAAQS
from 5 years to 10 years. In practice, a 10-year review period
is more appropriate particularly in light of the fact that the
EPA is not meeting the existing 5-year deadline.
    For example, the next major NAAQS will be for particulate
matter (PM). The statutory deadline by which EPA must
promulgate a new PM standard is 2017, but the EPA has stated it
will likely need until 2021--that's 9 years, not 5 years.
    The bill also authorizes the Administrator of the EPA to
consider technological feasibility as factor when revising
these standards and provides a pathway for States to seek
relief in certain exceptional situations.
    When this bill recently passed the House, the National
Association of Manufacturers commented that, it ``would ensure
continued air quality improvements across the country, while
better aligning the rule's requirements with the realities of
the economy, technology and existing policies.''
    S. 2882 bill will provide greater predictability and
certainty for American businesses while continuing the national
trend toward cleaner air. I commend Senator Capito and the
subcommittee for its consideration of this legislation and urge
the full committee to pass the bill as soon as possible.
    Thank you.
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Capito. Hearing no objection, I would like to
recognize the Ranking Member and recognize him for 5 minutes
for an opening statement.

          OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. THOMAS R. CARPER,
            U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF DELAWARE

    Senator Carper. Thanks, Madam Chair. Thank you for holding
our hearing today.
    I do want to thank each of our witnesses. Some of you have
been here before. It is nice to see you again, whether it is
your first time or not your first time. We are delighted that
you are here. We welcome your testimony and your counsel for
all of us.
    Today is a day to remember not just because they are having
a sit-in over in the House of Representatives; that is not
memorable enough. But this morning a number of our colleagues,
Senator Inhofe, myself, other members of this committee had the
privilege of witnessing the signing of a major piece of
environmental legislation, something that hasn't happened in
this country in really a couple of decades. Today the Frank R.
Lautenberg Chemical Safety Act for the 21st Century was signed
into law, due in no small part to the good work of Senator Jim
Inhofe, Chairman of our full committee, David Vitter, and
others. Also in a supporting role here, this young man here to
my left, Ben Cardin, our colleague from Maryland.
    This legislation overhauls a 40-year-old law that never
worked, a law that was supposed to regulate chemicals used in
products that we rely on every day. It never worked in 40
years. Finally we just worked through all of our differences
and decided to replace it with legislation that will do good
things for our environment, do good things for our health,
including especially the health of young people, very young
people and very old people, and also provide businesses with
certainty and predictability that they need in order to be
successful, grow jobs, create jobs, especially in the
manufacturing sector.
    The legislation was built off of work done by Frank
Lautenberg, a former colleague from New Jersey. He was a true
champion of chemical safety. It was fitting that it is on the
same day our subcommittee discusses another of Frank
Lautenberg's passions, and that is clean air. For years,
Senator Lautenberg and I sat together, along with Ben Cardin
and our Chairman. He was fighting for clean air all those
years, for Americans.
    Frank and I, and Ben Cardin as well, we represent something
I called America's tailpipe, an area of our country where
emissions from other States, especially my native West
Virginia, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Kentucky, Tennessee, they
put bad stuff up in the air in order to get cheap electricity,
and it just drifts, with the westerly wind, over to our States
and fouls our air and makes us have to spend more money to
clean up our air, and we end up with more expensive energy. Not
fair.
    But for Senator Lautenberg the fight was deeply personal.
He had a sister who had problems with asthma, and she was a
member of the school board, and she always had a machine in her
car that she would use if she had an asthma attack. One day she
was at a school board meeting and suffered a really severe
asthma attack, and raced to try to get to her car and didn't
make it. So for Frank, clean air and asthma are really very
special issues. Dad, I think, worked in a factory, maybe a silk
factory, for many years in New Jersey and suffered lung
impairment as a result of his work.
    So I wish that the situation with Frank's late sister and
his dad were unique and the kind of things that didn't happen
much, asthma or other lung disorders, but they are not. There
are millions of people in this country who live with asthma. A
lot of them are young. According to the Centers for Disease
Control, almost 6.5 million kids in this country have been
diagnosed with asthma. That is 6.5 million kids who worry that
they may not make it to their inhaler in time if they have an
asthma attack.
    For decades we have known that ozone pollution is linked to
serious health problems like asthma attacks, strokes, heart
attacks, and other respiratory ailments. More recently, ozone
has even been linked to early deaths.
    Since 1970 Congress has asked EPA to provide our country
with national health standards protecting Americans from the
most harmful and common air pollutants. Since 1970. EPA
promptly did so in 1971, setting the first national health
standard that covered ozone pollution. Congress wanted to make
sure that the ozone health standards reflected the best science
available, which is why Congress requires EPA to review the
standard every 5 years. It is not something that EPA does on
their own; that is a requirement that they face under the law.
    Last year EPA finished its congressional mandated review of
the 2008 ozone health standard. After reviewing more than 1,000
scientific studies, EPA has concluded the 2008 ozone health
standard was too weak and no longer adequately protected public
health.
    Despite what many may say today, the EPA rule is purely a
statement of fact. To protect our health, we need less ozone
pollution. To protect the 6.5 million kids with asthma, we need
less ozone pollution in our air.
    Finally, many of our biggest emitters today of ozone
pollution, which include coal plants, older diesel engines, are
already scheduled to be cleaned up, and this means the costs of
compliance are not as high as they might have been 2, 4, or 6
years ago. I look forward to hearing today how we might meet
these new ozone standards to protect public health and how we
can meet these new health standards to ensure that we all
achieve cleaner and healthier air.
    I would just finally say advances in science and technology
that we use to understand what is making our air dirty has
given us a more thorough understanding of how we can make our
atmosphere safer for all of us, and I just hope we now seize
the opportunity, seize the day, which is really not an
opportunity at all, but I think a responsibility to do a good
job today of cleaning up our air so that generations of
Americans can live healthier lives and longer lives, and also
still have a good job.
    Thanks so much.
    [The prepared statement of Senator Carper follows:]

                  Statement of Hon. Thomas R. Carper,
                U.S. Senator from the State of Delaware

    I would like to thank the Chairman for having this hearing
today and thank our witnesses for taking the time to be here.
Today is a monumental day. This morning, many of my colleagues
and I had the privilege to witness the signing of a major piece
of environmental legislation--the Frank R. Lautenberg Chemical
Safety for the 21st Century Act was signed into law, which
overhauls a 40-year-old law that regulates thousands of
chemicals used in products Americans rely on every day.
    The bill that was signed today builds off the work done by
the late Senator Frank Lautenberg, who was a true champion of
chemical safety. I think it is fitting that on the same day our
subcommittee discusses another of Senator Lautenberg's
passions--clean air.
    For years, Senator Lautenberg and I sat together on this
committee fighting for cleaner air for all Americans. We both
represented States whose residents live in what I like to call
``America's tailpipe.'' Other States' dirty emissions from cars
and power plants drift east to our States, impacting the health
of our constituents.
    For Senator Lautenberg, the fight was deeply personal. It
is hard to forget his story. His sister was diagnosed with
asthma and had a machine in her car that would help her breathe
during asthma attacks. One day at a school board meeting, his
sister felt an asthma attack coming on. She raced to her car to
get to her machine. Tragically, she didn't make it in time and
as a result passed away.
    I wish this were a unique case--but sadly, there are
thousands of mothers, fathers, brothers and grandparents in
this country that have lost a loved one because of asthma.
    Millions in this country are living with asthma. According
to the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), 6.3 million children
in this country have been diagnosed with asthma. That means
that more than 6 million children worry every day if they will
make it to their inhaler in time if they have an asthma attack.
    For decades, we have known that ozone pollution is linked
to serious health problems like asthma attacks, strokes, heart
attacks and other respiratory ailments. More recently, ozone
even has been linked to early deaths.
    Since 1970 Congress has asked EPA to provide the country
with national health standards protecting Americans from the
most harmful and common air pollutants.
    The EPA promptly did so in 1971, setting the first national
health standard that covered ozone pollution. Congress wanted
to make sure the ozone health standard reflected the best
science available, which is why Congress required the EPA to
review the standard every 5 years.
    Last year, the EPA finished its congressionally mandated
review of the 2008 ozone health standard. After reviewing more
than a thousand scientific studies, the EPA has concluded the
2008 ozone health standard was too weak and no longer
adequately protected public health.
    Despite what many may say today, the EPA's rule is purely a
statement of fact--to protect our health, we need less ozone
pollution. To protect the 6.3 million children with asthma, we
need less ozone pollution in our air. Fortunately, many of
today's biggest emitters of ozone pollution--such as old coal
plants and older diesel engines--are already scheduled to be
cleaned up. This means the costs of compliance are not as high
as they might have been 2, 4 or 6 years ago.
    Since Senator Lautenberg's sister passed away over 30 years
ago, we have made remarkable progress in cleaning up harmful
ozone air pollution. But let us honor her memory by never
letting the challenge we face to ensure our air is clean and
healthy for children and adults alike slip out of sight.
Advances in science and the technology we use to understand
what is making our air dirty have given us a more thorough
understanding of how we can make the atmosphere safe for
everyone. We must now seize the opportunity--which is really
not an opportunity at all, but rather a responsibility--to do a
good job today of cleaning up our air so that the generations
of tomorrow can live healthier and longer lives.

    Senator Capito. Thank you, Senator.
    And with that I would like to welcome the witnesses. I will
just introduce you as you begin your testimony. I would ask
that you keep your statements to 5 minutes, as you know. I know
you have submitted written statements for the record.
    Mr. Kurt Karperos, who currently serves as Deputy Executive
Officer on the California Air Resources Board. Welcome.

  STATEMENT OF KURT KARPEROS, P.E., DEPUTY EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
                 CALIFORNIA AIR RESOURCES BOARD

    Mr. Karperos. Good afternoon, Madam Chair, Ranking Member
Carper, and members of the subcommittee. My name is Kurt
Karperos. I am Deputy Executive Officer for the California Air
Resources Board. In this role I am responsible for
implementation of the Clean Air Act statewide, including
meeting Federal air quality standards in areas with the most
persistent pollution, the greater Los Angeles area, that we
refer to as the south coast, and the San Joaquin Valley.
    Today I want to cover three points in my testimony: first,
meeting Federal health-based standard for air quality is
achievable in California; second, economic growth and
development, while taking steps to reduce emissions, is not
only possible, it is a reality in California; and third,
delaying the standards, as Senate bill 2882 and 2072 would do,
is unnecessary and would negatively impact the health and well-
being of millions of people.
    About one-third of California's 38 million residents live
in regions with pollution levels that exceed the standard. That
includes almost 5 million children, with nearly half a million
suffering from asthma. California supported EPA's setting of
the more health protective ozone standard because reaching that
standard would reduce premature mortality, emergency room
visits for asthma, hospitalizations, and lost work days and
school days. Simply putting, meeting the ozone standard is a
public health imperative.
    California has a long history and successful history of
meeting health-based standards. Of California's 19 areas that
once exceeded the 1-hour ozone standard and the original 8-hour
ozone standard, only 4 exceed those today. Continued progress
has occurred in the San Joaquin Valley. This extreme non-
attainment area now meets the 1-hour ozone standard. And just
last week the San Joaquin Valley Air District adopted a plan to
meet the 8-hour ozone standard.
    The south coast is more challenging, but progress is also
significant. The region once measures 1-hour ozone values above
the standard on over 200 days per year. Today that has dropped
to 10. Similarly, the number of days over the 8-hour standard
has been cut in half since 1990. This progress has occurred at
the same time that California's population has increased by
over 25 percent and the State's gross domestic product has more
than doubled.
    At the same time we have been reducing emissions,
California's economy has continued to grow and prosper. Over
the last year, California grew to be the world's sixth largest
economy, and job growth in the State over the last 12 months
was 2.8 percent, outpacing the national average of 1.9 percent.
This while pursuing the Nation's most aggressive air quality
and climate policies.
    Today the air pollution control industry in California
generates approximately $6 billion a year and employs over
30,000 people. The clean energy sector generates an additional
$27 billion a year and employs approximately 125,000 people.
Looking forward, EPA estimates that achieving the new ozone
standard would save Californians an estimated $0.4 billion to
$1.3 billion per year when accounting for both the cost of
reducing emissions and avoided costs of health care.
    With its health-based air quality standards, meaningful
deadlines, and requirements for comprehensive plans, the Clean
Air Act has been the tool for achieving this combined air
quality and economic success. The Clean Air Act requires early
comprehensive planning. Delay can increase costs. And
California uses the early planning required by the Clean Air
Act as a tool to minimize costs in the long-term. In fact,
California will adopt a plan this year that will not only
provide the reductions needed to meet the 75 parts per billion
ozone standard in 2031; it will also provide most of the
emissions reductions needed for the new 70 parts per billion
ozone standard in 2037.
    California has used advanced technology provisions of the
Act to drive innovation. Electric cars are the prime example.
And now California is working with EPA to demonstrate that
trucks can be 90 percent cleaner by optimizing the technologies
on the trucks today. Finally, working with EPA, businesses, and
the public, we take advantage of the flexibility of the Clean
Air Act to tailor control strategies to best fit California.
    California's success is proof that Senate bill 2882 and
2072 are unnecessary. The bills would mean more people would
breathe dirty air longer because they push off deadlines, erode
requirements for incremental progress, and undermine the Clean
Air Act's requirements for comprehensive air quality
strategies. Senate bill 2882 would inappropriately insert
control costs into EPA's science-based process for setting air
quality standards. How healthful our air needs to be is not a
function of the cost to clean it up; it is a function of what
air pollution does to the human body.
    In closing, let me stress that meeting the Federal health-
based ozone standards is achievable. Clean Air Act provisions
provide the needed flexibilities to effectively accomplish
these goals, including in the areas with the Nation's most
persistent pollution problems. Second, setting healthful air
against economic prosperity is a false choice, as California
has demonstrated. Third, delaying the standards will harm the
health and well-being of millions of people in this country.
The San Joaquin Valley is home to high rates of poverty and
environmental pollution, so it is especially critical to
continue progress in that region. The economic costs of health
care associated with polluted air are substantial and far
exceed the costs of cleaner technologies.
    Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Karperos follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Capito. Thank you.
    Our next witness is Dr. Mary Rice, who is the Vice-Chair on
the American Thoracic Society's Environmental Health Policy
Committee. She also works as an Assistant Professor of Medicine
at the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, an affiliate of
Harvard Medical School. And I know she has been here at least
one other time because I remember her testimony. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF MARY B. RICE, M.D., VICE-CHAIR, AMERICAN THORACIC
 SOCIETY ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH POLICY COMMITTEE, AND ASSISTANT
 PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE, BETH ISRAEL DEACONESS MEDICAL CENTER,
                  HARVARD MEDICAL SCHOOL BIDMC

    Dr. Rice. Thank you.
    Chair Capito, Ranking Member Carper, and other members of
the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify
today on behalf of the American Thoracic Society about why
EPA's new ozone standard and the Clean Air Act requirement of
regularly reviewing and implementing health standards for the
major air pollutants are so good for the health of American
adults and children.
    I am a pulmonary and critical care physician at Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center at Harvard Medical School, and I care
for adults with lung disease, many of whom suffer from asthma
or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, commonly known as
COPD.
    Let me begin with a discussion of ground-level ozone, also
known as smog. Ozone pollution is bad for people with lung
disease, and this has been known for decades. Ozone is a
powerful oxidant that irritates the tissue of the lung and
damages it. Hundreds of research studies in different areas
across the U.S. and around the globe have demonstrated that
when people with common diseases like asthma or COPD are
exposed to ozone, they get sicker.
    One of my patients with severe asthma tells me that on high
ozone days in the summertime he feels his chest tighten, and he
can't get enough air. He stays home from work, and he uses his
inhaler around the clock, but it is not enough; and that is
when he calls me, asking me for stronger medications. One
summer his breathing difficulties were so severe that he landed
in the hospital twice, and he had to take a leave of absence
from his job.
    This is just one story. But hundreds of studies have
demonstrated that increases in ozone result in children and
adults having to increase use of medication to control asthma,
having to miss school or work to visit the doctor or going to
the emergency room, and hospitalization for respiratory
illness. For some, especially the most vulnerable people, such
as older people and people with COPD, high ozone days can
result in premature deaths.
    The more that scientists and physicians have studied the
health effects of ozone, the more confident the medical
community has become about ozone's harmful effects on the
respiratory health of children, adults, and the elderly.
    The new ozone standard is based on literally hundreds of
studies that demonstrate that the previous ozone standard of 75
parts per billion was not sufficiently protective of human
health because there are serious harms to human health at ozone
levels below 75. These serious harms include high risk of
asthma attacks for people with asthma, high risk of
hospitalization for respiratory infection among babies and very
young children, and a higher risk of death for older adults.
    What often gets lost is that ozone pollution is bad for
otherwise healthy people, too. Research has shown that when
normal healthy adults are exposed to ozone, including levels
below the previous standard, lung function is reduced.
    Based on this wealth of medical evidence, professional
medical societies across the country have called for a more
protective ozone standard. These societies include the American
Thoracic Society, the American Medical Association, the
American Academy of Pediatrics, and others. The evidence of
health effects of ozone above 70 parts per billion, even among
young and healthy adults, is conclusive and undisputed in the
medical community. Based on this strong evidence, the U.S. EPA
set a public health standard for ozone of 70, and this new
standard is expected to improve lung health, prevent asthma
attacks, and save lives.
    As a physician, I need to keep up with the pace of medical
discovery and incorporate those advances in my care of
patients. The pace of scientific discovery is rapid, and we
need the U.S. EPA to review the most up to date medical
evidence at regular intervals to ensure that we set health
standards that are sufficiently protective. Our knowledge about
the health effects of air pollutants and their treatment is
growing dramatically each year, which is why the American
Thoracic Society is very concerned about proposals that would
relax the interval for reviewing air quality standards from 5
to 10 years.
    When a new drug is approved to cure disease, we don't wait
10 years to update practice guidelines. In the past 2 years
alone, several new and important studies which advance our
understanding of ozone's health effects have been published,
and these include the studies showing that long-term exposure
to ozone is associated with the development of acute
respiratory distress syndrome, which is a major cause of
mortality in American ICUs.
    Why would we delay 10 years to consider and act on new
information that is showing the adverse health effects of air
pollution? That is not consistent with the standard of care
that my patients expect of me.
    My patients and every American depend on the U.S. EPA to
review the most up to date evidence at regular intervals and
keeping with the pace of medical progress and to establish and
implement standards based on those reviews to protect the
health of Americans. Above all, we must protect the health of
the most vulnerable members of our society, including young
children and the elderly, who have no other way of protecting
themselves from the health effects of outdoor air pollution.
    I appreciate the opportunity to appear before the
subcommittee, and I look forward to answering your questions.
Thank you.
    [The prepared statement of Dr. Rice follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Capito. Thank you.
    Our next witness is Mr. Andrew Chesley. He is the Director
of San Joaquin Council of Governments in California.
    Welcome.

STATEMENT OF ANDREW T. CHESLEY, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, SAN JOAQUIN
          COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS, STOCKTON, CALIFORNIA

    Mr. Chesley. Good afternoon, Chair Capito, Ranking Member
Carper, and members of the committee. My name is Andrew
Chesley. I am the Executive Director of the San Joaquin Council
of Governments in Stockton, California. My region is located
just east of the Bay Area, and each morning 65,000 of our
residents make their way into the East Bay to work. We are one
of the fastest growing counties in California, with a median
income well below the State of California average.
    I am here on behalf of the eight San Joaquin Valley
Metropolitan Planning Organizations in Fresno, Kern, Keen,
Madera, Merced, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Tulare. All are
striving to seek was to address the underlying causes of
poverty, poor health, and unemployment that rank our valley
among the worst in the country.
    Silicon Valley covers an 8-county geographic area, and it
is approximately 4 million people, about the size of West
Virginia. We are known for our agricultural prowess, but we
also have 3 of the 100 largest cities in the country, so on any
given day our air quality challenges rival those of the Los
Angeles Basin.
    As a valley, we will deliver over $40 billion in
transportation projects over the next two decades if we are not
tripped up through a labyrinth of air quality tests requiring
massive coordination among numerous regional, State, and
Federal agencies. These transportation projects put people to
work, move agricultural goods to market, move freight from
northern to southern California, and increase the mobility of
Californians, all valuable public policy objectives.
    As of right now, we want to put the new resources and the
facts back to work. I have attached Figure 1, which highlights
the magnitude of the air quality challenge before us. We must
reduce our pollution levels by over 90 percent over the next
two decades to meet the 2015 ozone standard.
    I am here today to support a strong Clean Air Act with
common sense revisions that actually results in improved air
quality. I am also here to speak about the risks regions like
the San Joaquin Valley face in implementing the Clean Air Act
as we strive to maintain our region's crumbling transportation
infrastructure.
    Since its adoption, the Clean Air Act has led to
significant improvements in air quality and public health
throughout our region. We support provisions of the Clean Air
Act that call for review of health-based standards, clean air
objectives that are technology forcing and clean air delays
that ensure expeditious clean up and timely action. However,
the Clean Air Act was last submitted in 1990. Over the last 25
years, local, State, and Federal agencies and affected
stakeholders have learned important lessons from implementing
the law, and it is clear that a number of provisions of the Act
are leading to unintended consequences and misdirected
resources.
    I am here to support the San Joaquin Valley Air District's
pursuit to, in a very small way, make the Clean Air Act more
workable as part of Senator Capito's bill.
    In the San Joaquin Valley we have eight MPOs in one non-
attainment area. Sometimes we are eight MPOs, and sometimes we
have to function as one. Action on any one MPO's regional
transportation plan requires the other seven be not just in
compliance with the Act but also with every process test in the
endeavor. This means there are years where if one MPO fails, we
all fail, and that results in losing transportation funding. We
are connected at the hip in that way.
    We are in non-attainment for two ozone standards: three
PM2.5 standards and PM10. We anticipate
being designated non-attainment for the 2015 ozone standard as
well. Each of these standards requires a separate air quality
plan which leads to multiple requirements and deadlines.
Currently, there are 51 different air quality tests each of the
eight transportation planning agencies must pass.
    Regionally, that is 408 tests before we spend $1 of Federal
transportation funding. Eighty of those tests are for ozone
alone. Failure of one test by one MPO can result in the loss of
funding for all eight, and we are set to do this on a schedule
that averages about once every 2 to 3 years.
    Needless to say, the process is complex and difficult to
explain. We have tried to do that in Figure 2, which is
attached. If any one of the processes is not completely in
perfect harmony and done on schedule with the others, the
result equals project delivery delays or the loss of funding.
Should synchronization of 11 processes not occur, we face the
potential for air quality conformity lockdown. Not that we fail
to meet the standards, but we fail to meet the process
requirements.
    It is something of a credit to the agencies involved that
we have only once fallen into a lockdown, until now. It is
inevitable that we will go into a lockdown in the coming weeks.
Target review dates in the case have slipped for the EPA,
placing us in a lockdown situation. In the Valley, about $450
million in potential project delays are on the table. Our
expectation is that we will exit the situation in 3 to 6
months, quite likely missing whole construction seasons.
    Examples of projects that will be impacted are a brand new
interchange, the widening of a local arterial that is presently
a mish-mash of two three-lane segments, and an operational
project to provide a continuous left turn lane for drivers on
residential streets.
    How we get into a lockdown is complex, but this is nothing
new. We have been there before, and we will get out of it
again. But these will become more frequent and even
intractable. Updating the Clean Air Act is needed to simplify
and streamline the process because this is not the reason a
region should lose transportation funding.
    In closing, we support a strong Clean Air Act with common
sense revisions that actually result in improved air quality.
We need a way to greatly reduce the almost biannual updates
with 51 tests that place our transportation funding at risk
constantly. Common sense amendments to the Clean Air Act that
you are considering today will benefit our efforts in the San
Joaquin Valley.
    Thank you very much.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Chesley follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Capito. Thank you.
    Our next witness is Mr. Mark Raymond, who serves as
Commissioner and Chair of the Uintah County in Utah.
    Welcome.

   STATEMENT OF MARK RAYMOND, UINTAH COUNTY COMMISSIONER AND
                   CHAIR, UINTAH COUNTY, UTAH

    Mr. Raymond. Good afternoon, Madam Chair and members of the
committee. I am Mark Raymond, and I serve as the Chairman of
the Uintah County Commission, located within the Uintah Basin
in eastern Utah.
    I am honored to testify before the committee today to
support the legislation being considered, S. 2882 and S. 2072,
and discuss the issues we face in controlling ozone levels in
the Uintah Basin, especially the unique occurrence of high
winter ozone levels. Additionally, I want to thank our own
Senator Hatch for his efforts to craft and introduce S. 2072
and his willingness to work on this very difficult issue.
    Uintah County stands ready to assist in the passage of both
legislative proposals that will allow communities to deal with
ozone in a rational and responsible manner, without the scarlet
letter of non-attainment under the Clean Air Act.
    Only two places in the Nation experience high levels of
winter ozone, the Upper Green River Basin in Wyoming and the
Uintah Basin in Utah, both very rural areas. Higher winter
ozone levels are a result of a complex mix of geography,
weather, and emission conditions. Winter ozone levels rise when
snow cover and multiday temperature inversions occur. Snow
reflects the sunlight back up to the cloud cover, and this
becomes the perfect mix to allow pollutants to build and react
to produce ozone.
    However, in the absence of these conditions, exceedances of
EPA's ozone standard have not occurred. Ozone levels in the
Uintah Basin became the focus of local and State governments
and the EPA as we experienced several winters of high ozone
levels, higher energy production, and EPA's new standard of 70
parts per billion. Although it is clear that our energy
industry contributes to ozone precursors, those same releases
do not create high levels of ozone absent the precise weather
conditions.
    The energy industry is responsible for 60 percent of our
economy and 50 percent of our jobs. We need this industry to
feed our economy, which in turn provides the resources to
tackle our ozone problem. Under non-attainment, the industry
and their investments will relocate to other areas, leaving
few, if any, resources to fund and implement air quality
controls.
    Voluntarily, we have spent years and millions of dollars to
study, monitor, and model winter ozone. All we really know
after this work is that this is a very complex issue that
requires more years of research and monitoring to ensure that
investments are effective and that our modeling is accurate in
order to formulate appropriate controls.
    It is our fear that EPA, armed with the new ozone standard,
will put Uintah Basin into a non-attainment status, and we will
go into what could be decades of Clean Air Act compliance,
which may not actually improve our air quality.
    While EPA's current ozone standard is the hammer over my
community's head, the real driving force of our efforts is to
improve our air quality for our citizens. The Clean Air Act
provides limited tools for communities to proactively improve
air quality and provides disincentives to reduce emissions
ahead of a non-attainment designation.
    In 2002 the EPA initiated a strategy known as the Early
Action Compact Program. This program allows communities to
enter into compacts with EPA to improve air quality, hold off
non-attainment designation during compact implementation, and
allowed credits for investments made pursuant to the compact.
Twenty-nine areas from 12 different States submitted signed
compact agreements. Of the 29 areas, 14 areas were able to
defer non-attainment status and 15 areas were successful and
reached attainment due to their implementation in the Compact
Program.
    Pursuant to an EPA study, the Compact Program was
successful, gave local areas the flexibility to develop their
own approach to meeting the ozone standard, provided
communities with the tools to control emissions from local
sources earlier than the Clean Air Act would otherwise require,
and it improved air quality faster and promoted regional
cooperation. Unfortunately, EPA scrapped the program due to
litigation.
    Under S. 2072, State, tribal, and local governments would
initiate the application process and craft a proposed compact
plan for EPA's approval. Compact plans must ensure public
involvement, provide credits for emission reductions, contain
measurable milestones leading to attainment within 10 years,
emission inventories, modeling, and planning for future growth.
During the implementation period, the administrator agrees to
withhold non-attainment designation so long as the compact is
being implemented.
    S. 2072 puts local, tribal, and State governments in
control of improving air quality, fosters cooperation with the
EPA, and will provide true air quality improvements. So. 2072
also requires EPA to issue separate guidelines for communities
with winter ozone issues. These separate provisions are
critical to ensure that winter ozone compacts will accommodate
additional research and monitoring necessary for fully
understanding this complex issue.
    S. 2072 provides a proven, bipartisan, and successful
mechanism for communities to improve air quality without
destroying their economies. This is the goal of S. 2072, and we
urge the committee to approve this legislation.
    I thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I
would be happy to answer any questions that you may have.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Raymond follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Capito. Thank you.
    Our final witness is Mr. Glenn Hamer, who is President and
CEO, Arizona Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
    Welcome.

STATEMENT OF GLENN HAMER, PRESIDENT AND CEO, ARIZONA CHAMBER OF
                     COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY

    Mr. Hamer. Thank you, Madam Chair, Ranking Member Carper,
and members of the committee.
    My name is Glenn Hamer, and I am President and CEO of the
Arizona Chamber of Commerce and Industry, and we are the
leading statewide business advocate in Arizona.
    I appreciate the opportunity to testify here this afternoon
about the challenges and the economic impact to Arizona and
other States with a western focus of the EPA's new standard for
ground-level ozone. I have also submitted for the record a
written statement, along with a copy of our latest paper by the
Arizona Chamber Foundation and Prosper Foundation, entitled A
Clear and Present Danger: How the EPA's New Ozone Regulations
Threaten Arizona's Economy. That is a more comprehensive
examination of the issue.
    I would like to first thank the Chairwoman for her
extraordinary leadership in sponsoring S. 2882. We were
thrilled that earlier this month the House companion, H.R.
4775, passed the House. This is arguably one of, if not the
most important bills pending right now in the Congress for the
State of Arizona, and I will explain why in a bit.
    We agree that delaying the implementation, the 70 parts per
billion standard, is necessary, at the very least because it
relieves the immediate burden of complying with it. But the
legislation you have sponsored, Senator, also provides with the
flexibility and the roadmap we need going forward. This is a
smart piece of legislation.
    I also want to commend our State's Attorney General, Mark
Brnovich, for leading the legal challenge against the new ozone
rule in Federal court, which now nine other States have joined,
including Oklahoma.
    The economic impact of the new one-size-fits-all national
standard on Arizona and other western States is significant.
The 70 parts per billion standard will be virtually impossible
for Arizona and other parts of the country to meet. For Arizona
it is because of our unique location in the southwestern region
and because the primary sources of Arizona's ozone precursors
are outside our State's control.
    Protecting Arizona's air quality is obviously of utmost
importance to those here in Arizona. Tourism is one of our
largest industries, and we want to make sure the air is clean.
But the imposition of this new standard will unfairly punish
Arizona for things we simply can't control.
    First, Arizona's No. 1 source of nitrogen oxide emissions
is cars. Our State's location as a border State to Mexico and
as a gateway to southern California means that Arizona's
highways are heavily traveled. Yet because vehicle emissions
are regulated at the Federal level, any possible reductions are
really in the hands of the Federal regulators responsible for
setting those standards. This says nothing of the cars crossing
into the Arizona from Mexico that aren't even regulated by the
U.S. Government.
    Second, Arizona has incredibly high levels of biogenic or
naturally occurring background ozone. With our State's vast
ponderosa pine forest and high incidents of wildfires and
lightening--some are raging right now, unfortunately--biogenic
ozone emissions account for 43 percent of Arizona's volatile
organic compound emissions. In fact, major industrial sources--
this is an important point--only account for a mere 2 percent
of nitrogen oxide emissions in Arizona's largest and most
populous county, in Maricopa County, and just 1 percent of that
county's VOC emissions.
    Third, Arizona receives a significant amount of ozone from
California. This cross-border transmission is also referred to
as interstate transport. The EPA does not permit exclusions for
interstate transport, so even if our State's Arizona Department
of Economic Quality proved that this ozone originated in
California, a complicated and expensive process, Arizona is
still being penalized for ozone we did not create.
    Fourth, Arizona receives significant international
transport from Mexico, Canada, and Asia; and we like that this
bill requires a study on that issue. But because of the EPA's
rule, even if, again, we prove this, at great cost, we still
would not be placed out of non-attainment status.
    Finally, almost 70 percent of the land in Arizona is tribal
land or controlled and managed by the Federal Government. Yet,
we are still held responsible for emissions originating there.
Simply put, although Arizona has been making great strides from
the regulation just put into place in 2008, we will be really
hit very hard by this new regulation.
    I would like to also say we appreciate what Senator Hatch
and Senator McCaskill are moving toward in S. 2072 in terms of
providing additional flexibility. If I could leave the
committee with a couple of thoughts, we need to make sure we
get away from one-size-fits-all regulations. We simply can't
penalize States and regions that have issues beyond their
capability.
    In terms of Arizona, I just want to say that we are working
very, very hard to do everything possible under the 2008
standards to meet those, so for this to come up while we are
making such great progress is a real problem. And again, we
urge passage of the Chairwoman's very important legislation.
    Thank you.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Hamer follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Capito. Right on the number there.
    Thank you all very much for your testimony, and I will
begin the questioning.
    First of all, let me just make a statement. Neither one of
these bills would raise the standard of ozone allowed in the
atmosphere; it simply is asking for flexibility, longer
timelines, and to wait until some of the places that haven't
been able to get into attainment catch up before they are
further asked to squeeze down, which we have heard from Mr.
Chesley, obviously causing an issue.
    I did not realize, but I learned today, that one-third of
the 38 million people living in California don't meet the
standard, the 2008 standard. I think that is what our testimony
was. So, Mr. Chesley, can you tell me what is the deadline for
the San Joaquin Valley to comply with the 2008 ozone standard,
the 75 parts per billion?
    Mr. Chesley. Chair, I would actually prefer Mr. Karperos to
answer that specific question, but I have to say that what we
are doing in the San Joaquin Valley in terms of trying to
address those various standards that have been set, we have, I
think, 11 different ones that we have to be able to meet,
comply with this on this has been heroic and herculean. In
terms of the standards themselves, we are prepared to meet
those standards, but we need a schedule to do it that actually
is achievable and that does not place valuable public policy
interests, such as transportation infrastructure, at risk.
    Senator Capito. Right. I think the testimony was somewhere
around 2031, 2032 for California.
    Mr. Chesley. Yes. Yes.
    Senator Capito. Right. So that is an extension. That is a
longer timeline for California to be able to meet the standard
to be able to hang on your transportation dollars and also some
of your economic development issues. So, in my view, that is an
acknowledgment from EPA that just extending the deadlines is
not necessarily an advocacy for dirtier air or having a higher
ozone standard. They are trying to, at least in the case of
California, build into the flexibility that I hear other
members of the panel are asking.
    It was also testified that delay increases costs. The costs
to California obviously are going to be very good. I think the
part of the bill, my bill that says that we are going to have a
study that submits and looks into the impacts of emissions from
foreign countries, in my view, that would be welcomed, I think,
nationally, particularly from the State of California, Arizona,
and others on the West Coast.
    Mr. Hamer, the 2015 ozone standard saddled States with
significant new costs, one of which we heard is just the cost
of actually performing the tests and figuring out where you
are. That is not a reason to not do them, but I think some
flexibility there and some better technologies would probably
help as well.
    The Director of Environmental Protection in West Virginia
pointed out that the EPA has admitted that 30 percent of the
controls necessary to achieve the NAAQS at 70 parts per billion
are unknown. In other words, 30 percent of the technologies
that are going to be needed to meet the new standard are still
undiscovered or untested or unable to be put into an economic
model that can be actually used.
    So you mentioned to me, when I first met you, that Maricopa
County just now achieved the status of attainment. What do you
envision for your largest county in your State to be able to
move forward under a 5-year timeline as opposed to, say, a 10-
year timeline?
    Mr. Hamer. Madam Chair, thank you for that thoughtful
question. There is a difference between difficult to meet and
impossible to meet right now, and we are in the impossible to
meet. So out of the 10 counties in Arizona that have had to go
and to work to meet the 75 per parts standard, 9 of those
counties, including those in our most populous regions, would
be out of attainment.
    You mentioned another important part, that the EPA has
acknowledged that there should be flexibility, given the action
they have taken in California. We have been working very, very
hard, since 2008, which is not that long ago, to implement the
75 per part standard.
    But Yuma County would be a good example. In fact, our
director of the Department of Environmental Quality, Misael
Cabrera, recently testified before the House Energy and
Commerce Subcommittee and he specifically mentioned Yuma as a
place where there is not a lot of industry, but because of the
geographic region, right next to California and Mexico, it
would simply be impossible for that county to become in
compliance with the new standard.
    Senator Capito. Thank you very much.
    I would now like to recognize my cosponsor on S. 2882,
Senator Flake from Arizona, to make an opening statement about
the bill.

             OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JEFF FLAKE,
             U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

    Senator Flake. Well, thank you so much, Madam Chair. I
appreciate you and Ranking Member Carper allowing me to speak
in support of the Ozone Standards Implementation Act. I am
pleased to join the Chairwoman in sponsoring this bill.
    Since I testified last June on ozone reform, the EPA
finalized its rule on the ozone emission standard at 70 parts
per billion. In my opinion, this rule demonstrates complete
tone deafness on the part of the EPA, and it is particularly
detrimental, as we were hearing, to my home State of Arizona,
where the impacts of the EPA's failed air regulatory regime are
apparent. With these costly compliance requirements, this rule
will burden counties and businesses already working in good
faith, as we have heard, to meet the previous standard.
    I am particularly pleased to see Glenn Hamer here
representing the Arizona Chamber, giving a perspective from
Arizona businesses that are trying, in good faith, to meet
these standards, but were very much, in the case of the EPA
changing the rules in the middle of the game.
    I, for one, believe it is time for Congress to step in, and
this legislation includes a provision from the bill that I
introduced previously, called the Ordeal Act, that would change
the mandatory review of National Ambient Air Quality Standards
from 5 to 10 years. Among other provisions, the legislation
also phases in implementation of the 2000 and 2015 ozone
standards, extending the compliance date for the 2015 standards
to 2025. It remains crucial that States have the flexibility
and the time to implement their own innovative and proactive
measures here.
    Now, in response to the EPA tightening the standard despite
public outcry, I introduced a congressional resolution that
would permanently halt the implementation of EPA's final rule
on ozone tightening. I can tell you the outcry has not dimmed
in my State. I hear it statewide with the decision of the
attorney general to file suit over the rule and to be joined by
other States in that effort.
    I hear it in Phoenix as members of the business community,
such as Glenn here, realize that it is impossible, not just
difficult, but impossible for Arizona to ever comply with that
standard. And most recently my staff in Yuma attended a Board
of Supervisors work session on this very topic, just last week,
hoping to find a way to be protected from this last tightening.
This effort I pledge to work on and achieve.
    I am pleased that Congress is focusing on this and other
legislative remedies. I am committed to pushing this
legislation and will continue to introduce provisions providing
regulatory relief and flexibility to lessen the impact of this
devastating rule on Arizona's community.
    With that, Madam Chair, thank you so much for allowing me
to speak.
    Senator Capito. Thank you.
    I will turn it over to the Ranking Member, Senator Carper.
    Senator Carper. Thanks.
    Senator Flake, always good to see you. Thank you for doing
this today. I know you have other things to do. If you could
just stay for a couple minutes.
    I make a unanimous consent request, if I could, to enter a
couple letters from the environmental and health community
expressing, believe it or not, opposition to S. 2702 and S.
2882. I would also like to ask unanimous consent to enter into
the record taxable assistance from EPA that provides a
description on the EPA's earlier Early Action Compact Program,
as well as a comparison between the agency's earlier Early
Action Compact Program and S. 2702, and a conclusion that S.
2702 could result in delayed reduction of pollutants.
    Since Senator Boxer is going to be unable to join us today,
she has asked that I ask unanimous consent that her statements
be entered into the record.
    Senator Capito. Without objection.
    Senator Carper. Thank you so much.
    [The referenced information follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    [The prepared statement of Senator Boxer was not received
at time of print.]
    Senator Carper. The situation that they face in Arizona
reminds me of the situation that we have faced in Delaware, and
I have explained that here before. When I was Governor of
Delaware, we could basically shut down our State's economy and
still have been out of compliance because of all the pollution
that is put up in the air to the west of us, States to the west
of Delaware and the west of Maryland and so forth. So I am not
unsympathetic to the concerns that he raised.
    My staff has given me a map of the United States, and it is
too small for me to share with all of you, but it is a map of
the United States with a look ahead to 2025. It says EPA
projects that the vast majority of counties across the country
would meet the updated ozone standards in 2025 without
additional actions to reduce pollution. The map shows that they
still have quite a bit to do in California, but most of this
map is like there are no markings on the States, and it looks
they are free of any kind of additional actions that would be
required to be in compliance in 2025.
    I don't know who to ask here, but maybe Mr. Karperos, can
you take maybe a minute or two and show us how States can
address out-State pollution and their State implementation
program? I believe there are Federal programs already being
implemented that could go a long way to help reduce ozone
pollution across the country. As a result, I am told that only
15 counties outside of California are expected to be in non-
attainment by 2025. None of these counties expect to be out of
attainment in 2025 are in Arizona.
    Is that your understanding?
    Mr. Karperos. In my review of the modeling that U.S. EPA
did to lead to the map that you were showing, Senator, it is my
understanding that, yes, without any additional programs, just
implementation of the programs that are on the books, that
Arizona would achieve both the 70 and the 75 parts per billion
standard.
    I am not surprised by that. A similar situation in
California. We currently have approximately 19 areas that we
would expect, if the designations would be made today, would be
non-attainment for the 70 parts per billion standard. By the
time the designations are made next year, I expect it to be
much fewer than 19.
    There are a number of Federal programs that are absolutely
critical for dealing with this sort of situation and the
transport of emission from upwind. Certainly, Federal vehicle
standards are critical of the Clean Power Plan, and the
interstate provisions that EPA administers to help shield the
downwind States for responsibility for emissions that are
currently impacting downwind.
    So there are critical provisions that the Federal
Government needs to implement. In particular, when it comes to
both California attainment, as well as attainment throughout
the State and then downwind, Federal action to tighten
standards for trucks and locomotives is absolutely critical.
Right now we are partnering with U.S. EPA and the engine and
truck manufacturers, as I said in my opening statement, to
demonstrate that trucks, just by optimizing the technology that
is on the trucks today, would be 90 percent cleaner.
    That sort of Federal action, similar action on locomotives,
absolutely critical. There is sort of a two-fer in that sort of
issue: the emissions blow downwind plus those trucks drive
downwind. So you are getting actually a two-fer for that sort
of Federal action. Absolutely critical.
    Senator Carper. All right, thanks for that clarification.
    Sometimes, Madam Chair and colleagues, I think people think
that they wake up in the morning over at EPA and they say,
well, what can we tighten up today to make life miserable for
the other States. As it turns out, my understanding is that EPA
gets sued, not every day, but they get sued a lot because they
are not doing enough to comply with the laws that are already
in the books, and then they get sued because they are trying to
comply, work something out and comply with these laws that were
adopted under Republican administrations, if you can believe
that.
    EPA putting out every 5 years these standards for ozone,
why do they do this? Dr. Rice, why do they do this? Are they
doing this on a whim? Is there some kind of requirement that
they do this?
    Dr. Rice. So the EPA is required to review the medical
evidence at regular intervals so that----
    Senator Carper. Required by law?
    Dr. Rice. By law in order to incorporate the most up to
date science and health standards that they set.
    Senator Carper. If they didn't do that, would they be sued?
    Dr. Rice. I believe they would be.
    Senator Carper. Yes, they would.
    Dr. Rice. I would like to make the point that that is
particularly relevant for the health of children. So, for
example, if we delay the review period for another 10 years,
that means that findings that have been made about ozone, which
there have been in the last few months, won't even be
considered until 2025 at the earliest.
    That means that babies that are born today, they are
already going to be in grade school, and children's lungs
continue to develop after they are born all the way until they
are teenagers. There is evidence to show that air pollution is
harmful for child lung development. So it is a big deal.
    Senator Carper. OK, thank you.
    My time has expired. Madam Chair, I would just say those of
us whose roots are in West Virginia were raised by parents who
believe in common sense. Maybe you and I can just sit down with
our staffs and just figure out how we can use some common
sense. Those of you who express some interest particularly in
some changes to, I don't know, legislation that pertains to
transportation projects and that kind of thing, I would be
interested in a further conversation with you folks too. Thank
you.
    Senator Capito. Sounds good. Thank you.
    Senator Fischer.
    Senator Fischer. Thank you, Madam Chairman. I would say,
Senator Carper, Rhode Island and Nebraska have common sense as
well, so I know Senator Whitehouse and I would be happy to join
in any discussion.
    Senator Carper. Well, I heard Rhode Island has common
sense.
    Senator Fischer. Oh, now, just a minute. Come on.
    [Laughter.]
    Senator Fischer. No. Nebraska, we are known for our common
sense. Please.
    Senator Carper. Oh, that is right. I am sorry.
    Senator Fischer. Mr. Hamer, nice to see you again. The EPA
updated ozone standards in 2008. However, the EPA delayed
implementing the 2008 ozone standard for 2 years while it
pursued reconsideration. States are now catching up with
implementing that standard, particularly since the EPA just
issued implementation rules for the standard last March. And
now EPA has finalized a new ozone standard that overlaps with
the 2008 standards.
    So do implementation delays like this challenge local
communities and businesses that are tasked with putting ozone
air standards in place? And would legislation that we are
discussing today help to mitigate this type of harm?
    Mr. Hamer. Senator Fischer, very nice to see you again. It
is a great question and the issue that you are raising is that
while this new standard is finalized in 2015, Arizona continues
to make sure that it has everything buttoned up with the 2008
regulations.
    The new regulation certainly ratchets things up in a way
that we believe is impossible to meet at this time for the 9
out of the 10 counties that are already monitored. But it is a
very, very difficult situation. And I am trying to put this in
concrete terms.
    So here you have areas that are becoming in attainment, and
they are able to get the permits and do the things they need so
manufacturers could add jobs and things like that, and now you
have this new standard that would clearly throw big areas of
Arizona and other portions of the country out of containment. I
mean, this map really gives an idea. It is not just an Arizona
thing. They may have a disproportionate effect on the West, but
this hits a lot of different parts of the United States.
    And again, I just want to say that we are deeply concerned
about clean air in Arizona, deeply concerned. Human beings like
moving to our State. We are now the 14th largest State in the
country. We just passed Massachusetts.
    Senator Carper, you began your statement----
    Senator Fischer. This is my time.
    Mr. Hamer. Oh, I am sorry. But I was going to tie it to
your question.
    Senator Fischer. OK.
    Mr. Hamer. The issue is there is a formula that brings,
just like with the legislation that the President signed, there
is a formula that brings industry, environmental groups, States
together in a common sense way so we move away from one-size-
fits-all legislation.
    Senator Fischer. Right. And in the policy brief that you
included with your testimony, it discusses exceptional events,
and it describes them as an event natural or caused by human
activity that affects air quality is unlikely to occur and
cannot be reasonably controlled or prevented.
    This past spring Nebraskans were affected by two events,
the Anderson Creek fire from Kansas and Oklahoma, as well as
the Alberta wildfires, and that did result in air quality
issues in the State of Nebraska. So if air quality standards
were exceeded because of these wildfires, it seems as though
they should be considered exceptional events under the Clean
Air Act so that Nebraska can exclude them from regulatory
consideration.
    In your experience, can you describe how successful States
have been in having submissions for these exceptional events
granted by the EPA and what the costs are associated with that
process, and what is the typical timeframe that we can see when
the EPA is going to make a decision on those?
    Mr. Hamer. Senator, thank you for that question. And I want
to just commend Senator Flake for his extraordinary leadership
here. He has been a leader in the Congress on dealing with
exceptional events. I think he has put the word haboob in the
national lexicon. And those are things you can see from outer
space. It still is very, very difficult and very, very
expensive to work with the EPA to get these exceptional events
designated.
    Now, I will say we are making progress, but here is another
area----
    Senator Fischer. How long does it take? What are the costs?
    Mr. Hamer. I hope I am completely accurate, but I believe
it is about 4 to 8 months. Some of these, according to our
Arizona Department of Environmental Quality, could cost $50,000
per event. That is real money for a State government. Some take
longer and some cost more.
    Again, the legislation that is pending before this
committee is vitally important to including exceptional events
as something to be considered.
    Senator Fischer. Thank you very much.
    Thank you, Madam Chair.
    Senator Capito. Thank you.
    Senator Whitehouse.
    Senator Whitehouse. Thank you, Madam Chair.
    As is often the case, where you are helps determine where
you stand on these things, and like Senator Carper, where I am
is Rhode Island, and Rhode Island is a downwind State. I
distinctly remember driving to work in the morning on a nice
summer day and hearing the radio station tell me that today is
a bad air day in Rhode Island and that children and elderly
folks and people with breathing conditions should stay indoors.
    There wasn't much that we could do about it because most of
this came from out-of-State sources that were pumping it up
into the sky, and then it was drifting over Rhode Island.
Particularly NAAQS wasn't being sun treated during that time,
and by the time it hit Rhode Island we were not in attainment,
and there wasn't a thing we could do about it.
    So the enforcement of these standards has meant a big deal
to Rhode Island. We are back in attainment; our bad air days
are diminished; there are fewer asthma and hospital visits. And
that is all very real to people in Rhode Island.
    We are still looking at plants in West Virginia and
Pennsylvania that, by my calculation, are releasing 45,000 tons
more of NAAQS than they did just 7 years ago, which suggests
that it is not either the best technology or they are not
operating it at efficiency, that they have tailed off and
haven't upgraded their protections. So we downstream States
take this very, very seriously.
    To add to what Senator Carper said, if they are local
conditions, like in Uintah Basin there is a peculiar geographic
phenomenon that you can't get around, we are more than happy to
work with you on something like that. If there is a particular
unique event like a forest fire. But anything that takes a
broad cut at the baseline standards here puts States like mine
in real peril, and it is very frustrating.
    Let me ask a question. Let me ask Mr. Karperos. Clearly,
you would concede that there are costs to cleaning up air and
avoiding ozone and so forth, correct?
    Mr. Karperos. Absolutely, Senator.
    Senator Whitehouse. And would you also concede that there
are benefits and values from having cleaned up air?
    Mr. Karperos. Yes.
    Senator Whitehouse. What would you think of a study that
counted the costs to clean up the air but didn't count the
value or the benefits from the cleaned up air?
    Mr. Karperos. Missing half the equation.
    Senator Whitehouse. Yes. Pretty basic? Are there values,
for instance, the value of a child being able to play outside,
that are hard to put a monetary value on, but that ought to
count in considering whether or not the air should be clean?
    Mr. Karperos. Oh, absolutely. I would agree with you
completely.
    Senator Whitehouse. So if you go to a purely monetary
standard, you are likely to understate the benefits.
    Mr. Karperos. Yes.
    Senator Whitehouse. And there is a place in Mr. Hamer's
testimony. By the way, welcome back. I really enjoyed working
with Senator Kyl. Any staffer of his I am for, so than you for
being back here.
    Mr. Hamer. Thank you, Senator.
    Senator Whitehouse. You say in your testimony, this would
be a question for Dr. Rice, some studies, while inconclusive,
suggest that ground level ozone, on its own or when mixed with
other potential pollutants such as particulate matter, can have
adverse health consequences like asthma and bronchitis.
    Let me ask you first, Dr. Rice, is this an area in which
you have some expertise?
    Dr. Rice. Yes, it is, Senator. I study air pollution in
addition to taking care of patients.
    Senator Whitehouse. And how do you react to the suggestion
that the studies that link ground level ozone to health
consequences like asthma and bronchitis are inconclusive?
    Dr. Rice. I disagree with that statement. There is a
preponderance of evidence spanning decades of ozone, chamber
studies, observational studies, looking at thousands and
thousands of people, and they have conclusively shown that
there health effects of ozone exposure, particularly for the
lungs.
    Senator Whitehouse. As we go forward and as people learn
more about these illnesses and how the pollutants relate to the
illnesses, are there scientific advancements that are made that
can indicate that the standard needs to change?
    Dr. Rice. Certainly, Senator. The Clean Air Act is an
amazing success story, and air quality has improved
dramatically, and that has allowed us to look at the health
effects of air pollution exposure at lower and lower levels. In
my own research, I found that exposure to ozone within the
previous standard caused the lung function of healthy people to
be worse, and that is one small piece of information that is
added to the wealth of research that has been informing how the
EPA sets air quality standards.
    Senator Whitehouse. And if in fact it is scientific
evidence about human health that drives the change in the
exposure levels, is it fair to describe that as just changing
the rules in the middle of the game?
    Dr. Rice. Can you explain that better? I am not I
understand the question.
    Senator Whitehouse. We had a comment earlier that to change
this is the equivalent of changing the rules in the middle of
the game.
    Dr. Rice. Right.
    Senator Whitehouse. If you are changing the rules because
the science indicates that that is where the safe level is, is
that a fair characterization of what is going on to just call
it changing the rules in the middle of the game?
    Dr. Rice. Certainly not. I wouldn't put it that way. The
rules have all along been that the EPA is obligated to set air
quality standards based on the protection of human health with
an adequate margin of safety. As we learn more and more about
the health effects of air pollution, we have set those
standards lower and lower because we want to protect the health
of adults and of children.
    Senator Whitehouse. Thank you, Chairman.
    Senator Carper. Thank you.
    Senator Cardin.
    Senator Cardin. Thank you, Madam Chair. I thank you for
this hearing. I was here listening to most of the
presentations, then I had a meeting in my office and was
listening to the question and answer, and I just really wanted
to come back and thank particularly Dr. Rice and Mr. Karperos
for your comments in regards to the health related issues,
because I think that is the key point.
    Dr. Rice, I was reading your testimony in preparation for
today's hearing, and I was impressed by the fact, if I asked
the people in Maryland what the difference is between 75 or 65
ppbs, they wouldn't have the faintest idea what I am talking
about. But they do know the impact of a bad smog day, and
parents particularly know that when I hear from parents that
they can't let their kids go to camp on a given day. And then
the parents stay home from work, and they see the impact of
that.
    I want you just to elaborate a little bit more because one
would say, well, is reducing it by this amount, does it really
make any difference? What does 1 ppb really mean? And I was
impressed by your written testimony where you indicated that
each point means people are going to be dramatically impacted.
Can you just tell us the difference on these standards as to
what it means?
    Dr. Rice. Certainly, Senator Cardin. So ppb refers to parts
per billion. It is a concentration of the pollutant in the air,
and the standard is set according to an average over 8 hours.
But what we are really talking about is relationships between
how high the level of the pollution is and health effects.
    So if I can give you another example, in the city of
Atlanta during 1996, during the Olympics, there were changes
that were made that reduced the level of traffic in the city
for a short interval during the Olympic Games. When scientists
looked back at the experience during those Olympics, not only
did traffic levels go down, but ozone concentrations went down
from 80 ppb to 60 ppb. That resulted in a 44 percent decrease
in asthma admissions for kids during that time interval who
were on Medicaid.
    So there are real children. When you looked at the rate of
kids coming in with asthma attacks before the Olympics, you
looked at the rate during the Olympic period, and then you
looked at it afterwards, you found that there was a real
decrease in the number of kids getting sick when the ozone
level decreased.
    Senator Cardin. Mr. Karperos, California is usually used as
the example of the State where the challenges are the greatest.
Your testimony is that this rule is doable and that California
will be able to move forward and be able to accomplish this. So
these are achievable goals?
    Mr. Karperos. Thank you, Senator Cardin. Absolutely they
are achievable goals. The San Joaquin Valley, to use an
example, an extreme non-attainment area, one of the two in the
Nation, has achieved the 1-hour ozone standard. They have
developed a plan and are in fact implementing the plan and U.S.
EPA has approved the plan for attainment of the 80 ppb standard
in 2023.
    Just last week, the local air district adopted a plan to
achieve the 75 ppb standard in 2031. Part of my written
testimony was that ARB staff report reviewing that plan saying
it meets all the requirements of the Clean Air Act. In fact, it
is the Clean Air Act for the reason they have made sort of
progress.
    Finally, my agency will be considering a plan to further
reduce emissions from cars and trucks that we think for the San
Joaquin Valley, again, to use them as an example, will provide
most, if not all, of the reductions needed for the 70 ppb
standard even before it is designated non-attainment.
    Senator Cardin. Of course, what the law envisions this
review to be done is to determine, first and foremost, what the
health standards should be to protect the public health of our
children and our families and our population; and then, second,
it needs to be within a realm of what can be achieved, because
otherwise it would not be achievable and we wouldn't have
effective regulations.
    From your testimonies, you believe that this change is,
first, needed for the purposes of public health and can be
achieved; and if we do stick with this schedule, families will
be healthier and will save not only misery, but will also save
resources in regards to health care and lost days at work, and
things on that line.
    Thank you, Madam Chair.
    Senator Capito. Thank you.
    I think that concludes. I thought Chairman Inhofe might
return, but he has been detained, so I would just like to thank
the witnesses.
    Just a final 2-second comment. I would like to say to
Senator Carper that I certainly want to look for common sense
solutions, ways to maybe massage the issue to make it so that
some of the concerns that we have heard voiced today would be
addressed. But I would also like to point out that the title of
the hearing is Examining Pathways Toward Compliance.
    So I think that shows that we are on the same pathway.
Sometimes we try to get there different ways. Hopefully we can
get together and find some easier methods for some folks who
are having more difficulty.
    Thank you all very much. With that, I will call the meeting
adjourned. Thank you.
    [Whereupon, at 3:50 p.m. the subcommittee was adjourned.]
    [Additional material submitted for the record follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

                                 [all]
