[Senate Hearing 114-296]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]





                                                        S. Hrg. 114-296

   NEW APPROACHES AND INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGIES TO IMPROVE WATER SUPPLY

=======================================================================

                                HEARING

                               before the

                              COMMITTEE ON
                      ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
                          UNITED STATES SENATE

                    ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

                             SECOND SESSION

                               __________

                             APRIL 20, 2016

                               __________

  Printed for the use of the Committee on Environment and Public Works



[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]






       Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys
                             __________

                         U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

20-688 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
  For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
  Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
         DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
                          Washington, DC 20402-0001












               COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS

                    ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS
                             SECOND SESSION

                  JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma, Chairman
DAVID VITTER, Louisiana              BARBARA BOXER, California
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming               THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho                    BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas               SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
JEFF SESSIONS, Alabama               JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi            KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND, New York
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska                CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota            EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska

                 Ryan Jackson, Majority Staff Director
               Bettina Poirier, Democratic Staff Director



















                            C O N T E N T S

                              ----------
                                                                   Page

                             APRIL 20, 2016
                           OPENING STATEMENTS

Inhofe, Hon. James M., U.S. Senator from the State of Oklahoma...     1
Boxer, Hon. Barbara, U.S. Senator from the State of California...     3

                               WITNESSES

Dalton, James, Chief, Engineering and Construction, U.S. Army
  Corps of Engineers.............................................     6
    Prepared statement...........................................     8
    Response to an additional question from Senator Inhofe.......    18
Bilodeau, Denis R., P.E., First Vice President and Director,
  Board of Directors, Orange County Water District...............    19
    Prepared statement...........................................    21
Price, Kevin, Senior Science and Technology Advisor, Middle East
  Desalination Research Center...................................    30
    Prepared statement...........................................    32
    Response to an additional question from Senator Inhofe.......    37

   NEW APPROACHES AND INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGIES TO IMPROVE WATER SUPPLY

                              ----------


                       WEDNESDAY, APRIL 20, 2016

                                       U.S. Senate,
                 Committee on Environment and Public Works,
                                                    Washington, DC.
    The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:01 a.m. in
room 406, Dirksen Senate Building, Hon. James M. Inhofe
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
    Present: Senators Inhofe, Boxer, Capito, Crapo, Fischer,
Rounds, and Gillibrand.

          OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES M. INHOFE,
            U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA

    Senator Inhofe. Meeting will come to order. We apologize
for being a few minutes late. We had a vote at 10 o'clock. So
that is our daytime job, and we have to do it.
    Drought conditions are still--well, they have and they
still affect many regions of the country. California and
Oklahoma have been dramatically affected. This morning we have
witnesses that represent Orange County, California, promising
new technologies of desalination, and the U.S. Army Corp of
Engineers.
    For the vast majority of the past 6 years, Oklahoma
suffered from a devastating drought event that had nothing to
do with global warming, I might add. As the drought reached its
worst in the summer of 2014, more than 60 percent of Oklahoma
was in the U.S. Drought Monitor's ``extreme'' category. More
than 30 percent of the State's land area was experiencing
``exceptional'' drought or worse category.
    Communities were rationing water. Some communities in the
hardest hit areas looked to re-use of wastewater and tapping
unconventional sources or those of marginal quality for non-
potable uses in order to free up more valuable fresh water
supplies.
    Evaporating lakes and ponds in Oklahoma forced cattlemen to
sell their herds and oil companies to search for increasingly
expensive alternatives to continue production.
    Abundant rainfall to excessive flooding conditions occurred
nearly a year ago which caused dangerous situations throughout
Oklahoma but greatly improved our water supply, at least for
the time being.
    Our water supplies are also overtaxed with old and often
failing infrastructure not able to keep pace with demand. These
problems affect communities all across the Nation. It is not
exaggerated to say that water supply issues limit growth and
impose a very real threat to local and regional economies and
people's quality of life.
    However, in Oklahoma, the communities have started planning
with business groups, agricultural interests and the energy
sector on the local level to develop regional water action
plans to resolve their mutual water problems. The foundation of
the water action plan model demonstrates that water, as the key
element in the State and local economies, it focuses on
unifying and enforcing stakeholders to develop near-, short-
and long-term regional strategies to maximize reliability and
diversify the supply of water.
    The severe drought conditions Oklahoma encountered forced
us to identify new sources of groundwater and further develop
our existing underwater supplies to address our over-reliance
on surface water, to build infrastructure and pipelines to
reliable underused water resources, building new wells--we have
tried it all. City planning and regional planning have been the
most efficient way of preparing to address the water supply
problems, but there are supportive roles for State and Federal
Government to assist our communities, and there are roles for
corporate citizens as well.
    For example, one area in Oklahoma hardest hit by the
drought is the city of Enid, Oklahoma. One innovative example
by the Koch Industries' is their nitrogen plant, one of the
largest fertilizer production plants in North America, uses the
city of Enid's treated wastewater for in-plant cooling water.
Eventually, this re-use project will free up almost 5 million
gallons of water each day. That's almost one-half of Enid's
total current usage.
    The Federal Government can have a role to play in assisting
the regional infrastructure planning among States. An example
of that are the chloride control actions on the Red River
between Oklahoma and Texas. These projects were specifically
authorized by Congress dating back to 1966, with chloride
control studies beginning at the Red River as early as 1959.
    Chloride control actions in Oklahoma and Texas have and
will provide new drinking water supplies, increase agricultural
irrigation and improve downstream water quality. In fact, Mr.
Dalton, I am currently working with the Corps, their Tulsa
district office, to develop a general reevaluation and review
and record a decision for the Elm Fork Chloride plant in
Oklahoma.
    At one point, some reservoirs in Oklahoma were less than 20
percent capacity. Now, many are nearly full with multiple year
supply. Although, presently the drought has subsided, plans
must continue, too, so that we know it is going to be coming
back.
    It is kind of funny, when we talk about this issue, for me
anyway. This was an issue in Oklahoma way back when I was in
the State legislature. The big issue at that time was
transporting the water from eastern Oklahoma to western
Oklahoma. It was really a situation that made everybody mad. So
this is not a new situation, and it is not just local to
Oklahoma. It is across the Nation.
    Senator Boxer.
    [The prepared statement of Senator Inhofe follows:]

                  Statement of Hon. James M. Inhofe,
                U.S. Senator from the State of Oklahoma

    Drought conditions have affected and still affect many
regions of the country. California and Oklahoma have been
dramatically affected. This morning we have witnesses which
represent Orange County, California, promising new technologies
in desalination, and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
    For the vast majority of the past 6 years, Oklahoma
suffered from a devastating drought event. As the drought
reached its worst in the summer of 2014, more than 60 percent
of Oklahoma was in the U.S. Drought Monitor's ``extreme''
category. More than 30 percent of the State's land area was
experiencing ``exceptional'' drought, the worst category.
Communities were rationing water. Some communities in the
hardest hit areas looked to re-use of wastewater and tapping
unconventional sources or those of marginal quality for non-
potable uses in order to free up more valuable fresh water
supplies. Evaporating lakes and ponds in Oklahoma forced
cattlemen to sell their herds and oil companies to search for
increasingly expensive alternatives to continue production.
    Abundant rainfall to excessive flooding conditions occurred
nearly a year ago which caused dangerous situations throughout
Oklahoma but greatly improved our water supply, at least for
the time being.
    Our water supplies are also over-taxed with old and often
failing infrastructure not able to keep pace with demand. These
problems affect communities all across the Nation. It is not
exaggerated to say that water supply issues limit growth and
pose a very real threat to local and regional economies and
people's quality of life.
    However, in Oklahoma, communities have started planning
with business groups, agricultural interests, and the energy
sector on a local level to develop regional Water Action Plans
to resolve their mutual water problems. The foundation of the
Water Action Plan model demonstrates that water is the key
element in State and local economies. It focuses on unifying
and forcing stakeholders to develop near-, short- and long-term
regional strategies to maximize reliability and diversify the
supply of water.
    The severe drought conditions Oklahoma encountered forced
us to identify new sources of groundwater and further develop
our existing underground supplies to address our over-reliance
on surface water, build new infrastructure and pipelines to
reliable and underused water sources, build new wells, improve
and refurbish existing reservoirs, and change water use
ordinances to encourage or require more water conservation.
    City planning and regional planning have been the most
efficient way of preparing and addressing water supply
problems, but there are supportive roles for State and the
Federal Government to assist our communities, and there are
roles for our corporate citizens as well.
    For example, one area in Oklahoma hardest hit by drought is
the city of Enid, Oklahoma. One innovative example by the Koch
Industries' nitrogen facility, one of the largest fertilizer
production plants in North America, uses the city of Enid's
treated wastewater for in-plant cooling water. Eventually, this
re-use project will free up almost 5 million gallons of water
each day--that's almost one-half of Enid's total current usage.
    The Federal Government can have a role to play in assisting
in regional infrastructure planning among States. An example of
that are the chloride control actions at the Red River between
Oklahoma and Texas. These projects were specifically authorized
by Congress dating back to 1966 with chloride control studies
beginning at the Red River as early as 1959. Chloride control
actions in Oklahoma and Texas have and will provide new
drinking water supplies, increased agricultural irrigation, and
improved downstream water quality. In fact, Mr. Dalton, I am
currently working with Corps' Tulsa District Office to develop
a general reevaluation review and record of decision for the
Elm Fork Chloride Control Plan in Oklahoma.
    At one point, some reservoirs in Oklahoma were less than 20
percent capacity. Now, many are nearly full with multiple
years' supply. Although presently the drought has subsided,
plans must continue so our communities are prepared for both
uncertainties but for growth as well. I look forward to hearing
from our witnesses this morning and new opportunities.

           OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BARBARA BOXER,
           U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

    Senator Boxer. I really want to thank you so much for this
hearing. We have some contentious hearings, I do not think this
one will be such. Because we are going to discuss innovative
technologies to improve water supply. This is something very
dear to me and significant for my home State of California.
    I tell you, I have gotten into some pretty heated
conversations, I was telling the Chairman, in my State, because
I really do support these technologies. Others just turn away,
say, it is too expensive, or we shouldn't do this. There could
be unlimited supplies of water for growth and all the rest.
    To me this is a moment in time--whether we believe climate
change is causing these droughts or not, what is the
difference? We don't have to fight about that. The fact is we
are dealing with these droughts.
    And so I know this issue is dear to me, as I see what is
happening. Even though we have had El Nino this year, it didn't
live up to expectations. It certainly has done a lot to help
us. But we know we are looking at long-term problems. We have
horrible arguments between all the stakeholders, whether
between the agricultural people and the fishing industries, and
the urban users and the suburban users. And they fight all the
way to the courthouse door.
    And Mr. Chairman, you and I know when you get to the
courthouse door one thing happens: delay, confusion, we don't
know the rules of the game. We need to have a water supply that
is there for us.
    Now, I am so pleased to have Denis Bilodeau here from the
Orange County Water District. I am really happy to see you,
Denis, because you have been engaged in the development and
implementation of water supply technologies for many years.
    Orange County, my latest notes say, tell me if I am wrong,
is the sixth largest county in our Nation. We have 2.4 million
people just in Orange County alone. Is that about right?
    Mr. Bilodeau. We have 2.4 million in our service area;
there are 3.2 million in total in Orange County.
    Senator Boxer. Three point two million, 2.4 million in your
service area. So we are literally talking about making sure
people can live comfortably and have the water that they need.
    This severe drought has forced our Governor to declare a
drought state of emergency. We have water restrictions. Again,
even though El Nino has done better up north, it has not done
that well down south. We know that we can expect more droughts
in the future.
    So we do face many challenges associated with this ongoing
drought, including over-tapped aquifers, mandatory water
restrictions, threats to our Bay-Delta ecosystem, to our
fisheries, to our agriculture. When you mention water in
California, everybody's back goes up because there are so many
arguments going on over diminishing resources.
    My view as a United States Senator is I do not take sides
between the jobs in the fishing industry and the jobs in
agriculture; they are all jobs. I don't take sides; I am trying
to get everyone to the table. I believe--that is why I am so
proud that my Chairman shares this, that we need to look at
ways to avoid these terrible battles. That means a bigger water
supply.
    When you get into where do you put in a dam, that starts
the march to the courthouse door. But if we were to be able to
move forward with desal, move forward with recycling, move
forward with conservation that makes sense, we don't have to
fight over these supplies. We need to work together to expand
the pool by using our water more intelligently and making sure
we can tap into these technologies.
    So we are very fortunate, Mr. Chairman, to have two
excellent witnesses. We probably have three excellent
witnesses. I know two of them who will offer thoughts on how
the Government can help. The Orange County water district will
explain how it converted wastewater into 100 million gallons
per day of clean safe drinking water, enough for 850,000
people.
    Mr. Price will talk about his experiences with desal in the
Middle East, particularly in Israel where so much truly
innovative water supply activity is occurring. So when people
look at desal and they say, oh, what are you thinking, they
should just talk to the folks who have been living with this
technology for a very long time.
    I am also pleased that the Corps is here, because they have
such an important responsibility for managing water around the
country. The Corps operates 30 dams and reservoirs just in
California. These reservoirs serve critical water supply needs.
The Corps must employ the latest technologies to ensure these
reservoirs are operated efficiently and can meet the growing
water supply challenges.
    I think today we can look for these opportunities to invest
in new technologies. We can also learn from our international
partners, such as Israel, who has confronted these supply
challenges.
    In closing, I would say this we have a chance in this WRDA
bill to make some more history, Mr. Chairman, to take a look at
this and start a new way of looking at water supply. Because
drought faces us; it always has, and it always will. It could
get worse. We are not sure, but we can't take a gamble on water
supply.
    Thank you.
    Senator Inhofe. One thing, Senator Boxer, that neither one
of us mentioned is the significance of the water in terms of
our military. It happens that right now in the audience we have
Bill Burgess and several of them from the city, from Fort Sill,
which is the city of Lawton. Right next door to it is Altus Air
Force Base. And it is something that really is critical.
Because the needs of those two, we have gotten to the point of
where they would almost have to shut them down from time to
time. That is a huge issue also it is affected by this.
    We welcome you to observe. You are observing a hearing
where Barbara and I love each other. We don't have any
disagreements. That is rare. But I hope you enjoy it.
    We have three witnesses.
    Senator Boxer. Remember this moment.
    [Laughter.]
    Senator Inhofe. We have three witnesses. Mr. Denis
Bilodeau, First Vice President and Director of the Orange
County Water District, as Senator Boxer said. Mr. James Dalton,
we know him, Chief, Engineering and Construction, U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers. Mr. Kevin Price, Senior Science and
Technology Advisor in the Middle East Desalination Research
Center.
    So we welcome all three of you here. We will start with
you, Mr. Dalton, and we will kind of work down. Try to keep
your opening statements to close to 5 minutes. You are
recognized.

         STATEMENT OF JAMES DALTON, CHIEF, ENGINEERING
         AND CONSTRUCTION, U.S. ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS

    Mr. Dalton. Thank you, Chairman Inhofe, Ranking Member
Boxer, and other distinguished members, thank you for the
opportunity to present information about the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers Civil Works program activities related to drought and
drought technologies.
    I would like to briefly discuss drought in general terms
and then provide some information on the actions that we have
taken with respect to drought, and finally touch on drought
technologies we are investigating.
    Drought, of course, is a deficiency in precipitation over
an extended period, usually over weeks, months, or years,
resulting in water shortage causing adverse impacts on
vegetation. But drought is a lot more complex than just the
lack of water. Drought is a relatively common weather related
phenomenon in North America and occurs to some extent every
year in some parts of the U.S. It affects our agricultural
water supply and many other aspects of our well-being.
    The Corps performs water management activities at its
reservoirs consistent with the project specific,
congressionally authorized purpose or purposes for each
reservoir.
    Two missions we often balance competing needs during
periods of drought are flood risk management and water supply.
It is important to keep in mind that most dams in the current
drought areas are solely authorized for flood risk management.
    For instance, as Senator Boxer just mentioned, the Corps
operates about 30 dams in California. Seventeen of those are
mostly for single purpose flood risk management, and 13 have
multiple purposes.
    Generally speaking, the Corps will not construct a project
solely for water supply but may include water supply as a
purpose in a project constructed primarily for one or more of
the three mission areas of the Corps of Engineers, which are
flood and storm damage risk reduction. No. 2, commercial
navigation and No. 3, for aquatic ecosystem restoration.
    The Corps water supply authorities recognize that the
States and non-Federal entities have the primary responsibility
in the development and management of their water supplies.
Water rights, of course, are the responsibility of the States.
The Corps does not own or sell water.
    Water supply storage in a Corps reservoir may be a key
component of the water supply plans for non-Federal entities.
So non-Federal entities that do not have storage in a Corps
reservoir may request that the Corps study and consider
reallocating existing storage from another authorized purpose
to water supply.
    Corps reservoirs are operated according to water control
manuals, which by policy include reservoir rule curves, and
where appropriate it includes drought contingency plans. The
purpose of the drought contingency plans is to provide a basic
reference for water management decisions and responses to a
water shortage in a basin due to drought.
    The Corps is working on methods and Web tools to assist in
understanding the projected droughts and how will this impact
Corps projects. The results of this work will serve as a guide
for developing a strategy to update the existing drought
contingency plans.
    The U.S. National Climate Assessment, published in 2014,
reported that climate is changing and is projected to continue
to change. The expected changes vary regionally and include
warming temperatures, resulting in altered precipitation
patterns, increasing heat waves and changing snow patterns and
droughts.
    There are two current efforts that we have underway to try
and assist with our ability to manage water resource for
climate preparedness and resilience. The first effort is
developing and implementing methods to update our drought
contingency plans to account for climate change. A second
method is to enhance reservoir sediment information to assist
in climate preparedness and resilience by helping to identify
current and future reservoir sediment volumes, which can affect
food and water supply.
    And a third effort we have ongoing is the Forecast-Informed
Reservoir Operations research at Lake Mendocino, which is a
pilot study that would use atmospheric river forecasting to
inform water management decisions in a manner which reflects
current and forecasted conditions. The results may indicate
whether this technology can be applied in actual operations of
certain projects.
    In summary, the combinations of water control manuals and
deviations that we can have with those manuals provide a great
deal of flexibility to respond to short- term or long-term
needs based on best available information and science
consistent with each project's congressionally authorized
purposes.
    Thank you.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Dalton follows:]

 [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]



    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Mr. Dalton.
    Mr. Bilodeau.

STATEMENT OF DENIS R. BILODEAU, P.E., FIRST VICE PRESIDENT AND
   DIRECTOR, BOARD OF DIRECTORS, ORANGE COUNTY WATER DISTRICT

    Mr. Bilodeau. Thank you Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Boxer
and members of the committee. I am Denis Bilodeau, and I am the
First Vice President of the Board of Directors of the Orange
County Water District. I am deeply honored to appear before you
today to discuss the most pressing issues of our time: the
provision of safe and reliable water supply.
    The Orange County Water District is located in Fountain
Valley in Southern California and provides groundwater to
Orange County, including 19 cities and water agencies serving
2.4 million people. Since 1933, we have taken great pride in
advancing the development of sustainable water supplies.
    In Orange County we live in a desert. The base flow of the
Santa Ana River, our main source of surface water, continues to
decline. Imported water supplies from Northern California and
Colorado are restricted.
    In the late 1980s we recognized that to preserve our
region's economic and social vitality, the challenges of
groundwater depletion, seawater intrusion and unreliable
surface water demanded an innovative solution. This initiative
grew into the Groundwater Replenishment System, which is a
joint project between my district and the Orange County
Sanitation District.
    The GWRS is the world's largest advanced water purification
system for potable re-use. It takes treated wastewater that
otherwise would be sent to the Pacific Ocean and purifies it
using a three-step advanced process. This treatment and
purification process produces high quality water that exceeds
all State and Federal drinking water standards.
    We are currently producing 100 million gallons a day which
is about 25 percent of our water supply. Our next and final
planned expansion will provide an additional 30 million gallons
a day.
    Senator Boxer, it was during your term on the Senate
Appropriations Committee that you were able to secure our first
Federal appropriation toward construction of the GWRS. Over a
5-year period, $20 million in Federal funding from the Bureau
of Reclamation's title XVI program leveraged over $72 million
in State, local and private funding to provide for the overall
$481 million construction of the Groundwater Replenishment
System. We greatly appreciate that. The GWRS has allowed our
region to take control of our future.
    There is no one size fits all solution to water re-use. The
GWRS establishes a technology foundation to design and build
innovative approaches to sustainable water needs. Therefore, I
encourage the committee to include funding for water re-use in
the WRDA reauthorization.
    Second, our district is currently exploring purchasing more
than 50,000 acre-feet per year of desalinated sea water or
enough water for more than 400,000 people from the purposed
Huntington Beach desalination project as a way to increase
local water supplies. The proposed project will be built and
operated by Poseidon Resources in the city of Huntington Beach.
The project is scheduled for final hearing before the
California Coastal Commission later this year. If approved by
the Coastal Commission my board will consider moving forward
with a purchase agreement for the water. The largest hurdle we
face, of course, is the economics of ocean desalination.
    Finally, one of the most cost effective solutions that we
avail ourselves involves water conservation. Conservation
through reduced demand is not going to solve our overall need
to assure that we have adequate water supplies. In order to
supplement our conservation program, my district entered into a
collaboration with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, who have
been a great partner, to leverage the investment that our
region and the Corps made in the construction of Prado Dam on
the Santa Ana River. Rather than using Prado Dam for a single
purpose flood protection, we recognized the potential of
conserving water at Prado during storm events that could
subsequently be recharged into our aquifer for future use. The
alternative would be to lose this water supply as it coursed
down the Santa Ana River to the Pacific Ocean.
    Senator Boxer, you were instrumental in assisting us in our
negotiations with the Army Corps, and this year we have already
accrued 31,000 acre-feet of water due to your efforts.
    Mr. Chairman, we appreciate your efforts for an orderly
passage of the WRDA bill. We have provided suggested policy to
facilitate enhanced conservation of Corps facilities. Our
recommendations to the committee arise from our experiences
over the past few years working with the Corps to implement a
long-term agreement to store water with a priority placed on
public safety in an environmentally protective manner. Simply
stated, a clear statement on the priority to approve and
implement water conservation activities needs to be made a part
of the reauthorized WRDA.
    Also, we need a clear statement to ensure that costs are
fairly allocated by guaranteeing that only the separable costs
attributable to the water supply conservation is allocated to
the local water agency.
    The ability to facilitate an expeditious and equitable
agreement may seem like an obvious approach to implement an
innovative and cost effective solution. But we need a strong
statement on the matter as part of the reauthorization of WRDA.
We stand ready to support the committee to this end.
    Again I thank you for the opportunity to appear before you
today.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Bilodeau follows:]

    [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


    Senator Inhofe. Thank you very much.
    Mr. Price.

    STATEMENT OF KEVIN PRICE, SENIOR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
       ADVISOR, MIDDLE EAST DESALINATION RESEARCH CENTER

    Mr. Price. Chairman Inhofe, Ranking Member Boxer and
members of the committee, I am Kevin Price, Senior Science and
Technology Advisor to the Middle East Desalination Research
Center in Muscat, Oman.
    My passion throughout my career has been the application of
new technology to the purification of nonconventional waters to
increase water supplies, reduce the risks of drought, increase
jobs and standards of living and to assist in resolving
conflict around the world. I will focus my remarks on
desalination and indirect and direct potable water re-use.
    Early in my Bureau of Reclamation career, I was responsible
for the desalination research portion of the Science and
Technology Agreement with Israel. During one of my trips, I was
asked by a television reporter why someone from the U.S. was
attending the Israel Desalination Society meeting. I explained
that the problems and solutions Israel was currently solving
would be important to the U.S. as it faced similar problems in
the future.
    I currently work for MEDRC, which is an international
institution created in 1996 as part of the Middle East Peace
Process and is hosted by the Sultanate of Oman. Members of
MEDRC include the Palestinians, Jordanians and Israelis as well
as the U.S. Department of State. MEDRC works to address two
grand challenges: water and peace. This is done through
capacity building in training and research.
    There is an important technical distinction that must be
made before proceeding with my remarks. Water purification
means a number of things depending on the audience. Regulatory
frameworks around the world describe what needs to be removed
from water and to what levels. For many, this means removing
suspended particles, bacteria, viruses and very large molecules
through helping the particles to stick to each other followed
by filtration. This will not work with many non-conventional
sources, because a major portion of the contaminants is
dissolved, not suspended as particles in the water.
    Desalination or the removal of dissolved materials is a
fundamentally different process than filtration. Desalination
is also a critical component of indirect and direct potable
water re-use.
    No longer is it necessary to think of drinking water,
wastewater and impaired water as separate entities. They are
all water, waiting to have the containments removed to the
desired level. Among the 21st century technologies are
microfiltration, ultrafiltration, reverse osmosis, membrane
bioreactors, humidification-dehumidification, capacitive
deionization, closed circuit desalination, forward osmosis and
a whole bunch of other technologies that people continue to
develop.
    The lessons learned in Israel have consequences for the
U.S. especially in the drought plagued areas near the sea.
Israel's water supplies have been limited from its creation.
They have had to learn how to conserve through public
education, reducing water losses and appropriate pricing.
Because the need for new sources was so immediate, they knew
membrane technology, which was invented and commercialized in
the U.S., would work and decided to move forward using
desalination without perfect information. They had good
knowledge from the experience of others and their own research
on how to manage the environmental effects of desalination such
as optimizing energy use, reducing chemical addition, reducing
entrainment and impingement of intakes, and mixing of the
outfall concentrate back into the ocean.
    In discussing this with Oded Fixler, the Deputy Director
General of the Israel Water Authority, he said that technology
is only technology, and it already works. The real issues are
broader such as who owns the water, the cost of water, whether
or not the cost is appropriate for crops and which crops, and
who will subsidize. By developing desalination as a part of
their integrated water resources, Israel was also able to
develop an industry that can now compete internationally. It is
important to note the differences between and a State like
California. Not only is the control of water highly fragmented
in California, the State is much larger than Israel. Israel has
a population of around 8 million in 8 million square miles.
California has a population of around 39 million in 164,000
square miles. In addition, the opportunities to move water
throughout Israel are much greater than in California.
    Some of the lessons I learned with my colleagues while I
was in Reclamation for generating innovation and unsolicited
proposal request for broad boundaries generates unexpected
ideas and proposals. Innovation should follow progression
related to risk taking and project size. Consistent funding at
low levels is better than higher levels of inconsistent
funding.
    It is imperative to have strong initial and periodic
technical reviews combined with freedom to accept risk when
studying the unknown. If research is to solve problems and meet
needs, a strong technology transfer must exist to pull
innovations from the laboratory into use. When moving
technology to rapid implementation, demonstration provides the
opportunity to involve all parties at an early stage.
    Mr. Chairman, this concludes my remarks. More detail can be
found in my written statement, and I would be pleased to answer
any questions at this time.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Price follows:]

  [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, all three, very much.
    Let me just restate that in Oklahoma the legislative goal
for chloride control is to reduce the naturally occurring
chlorides in the Red River. Now, multiple studies dating back
many, many years and designs have been completed, many of them
by the Corps of Engineers--we are talking over 40 years ago, in
1978 was one of them. Yet a single project has not been
constructed in Area 6, that is Southwestern Oklahoma, despite
the Corps spending $3.1 million in Area 6 over the past 10
years.
    Now, my question would be to you, Mr. Dalton. If all of
these studies and designs, at full Federal expense, have been
completed over the past four decades, then why is the Corps
asking for yet another study of the project to determine
feasibility of building projects to reduce the chlorides in the
Red River?
    Mr. Dalton. Mr. Chairman, that study we are looking at now
for Area 6 started out, as you mentioned in your opening
remarks, looking at now a re-evaluation of what had been
previously completed for that particular study. I think it was
maybe around 2005 or so that we looked at it and we started
revising the study or updating the study. At that time, we ran
out of money to do that.
    Since that time we have been looking and talking with the
State and county for, looking for a non-Federal partner to cost
share in that.
    Senator Inhofe. But there have actually been studies. They
completed studies we are talking over a period of 40 years. I
am looking at my situation. How do I go back to Oklahomans and
ask them to spend money for a new feasibility study when we
have gone through all of this? We have spent millions of
dollars. Not a shovel has been in the ground yet.
    Did you listen to Mr. Price's testimony? Do you think there
are some technologies--is this something, Mr. Price, where
technology is moving in desalination right now, and there are
areas like perhaps the area I referred to in Southwest Oklahoma
that might be able to benefit from some of these?
    Mr. Price. Yes, chlorides can be removed by desalination.
    Senator Inhofe. Yes, but if it is as simple as that, then
is it a matter of cost?
    Mr. Price. Generally, it is a matter of cost.
    Senator Inhofe. So your technology has not really had a
dramatic improvement in terms of reducing the costs?
    Mr. Price. In the past 30 years it has had a dramatic
improvement. Several orders of magnitude.
    Senator Inhofe. Is anything going on right now that we may
be overlooking in Oklahoma?
    Mr. Price. I could discuss it with the Corps of Engineers.
I am not aware that they would have kept up with the
technology.
    Senator Inhofe. Have you kept up with all the technology,
Mr. Dalton?
    Mr. Dalton. I am not familiar with exactly what the
chloride removal we are looking at for this particular project.
It is something we looked at as part of some of our other
projects, I believe. I do not have specifics on that.
    What I would like to respond to, Mr. Chairman, is that we
don't know how much is required to complete the study, how much
more work is required. As far as talking with the non-Federal
sponsor or citizens about why they should cost share, we plan
on taking advantage of the work that has already been done.
There's has been a number of parts of that study that have been
completed.
    What we need to do now is to take a look at what has been
done and determine what needs to be done so that we can provide
you with the work that we think is remaining and the cost and
schedule to do that.
    Senator Inhofe. Yes, that would be helpful. I remind you
and everyone else who is here that next week Senator Boxer and
I plan to go ahead and start the markup of the WRDA bill.
    Senator Boxer. Yes.
    Senator Inhofe. So we need this stuff now. I want to make
sure that anything that can be done, and these projects are the
kinds of projects we are dealing with in this bill. We want to
stay on top of this thing, and yes, I would like to have--to be
sure and I am sure as Mr. Price said, that the Corps has a lot
of research and all that. But just make sure there is not
something looming out there that would help us resolve this
problem. Because right now, we are getting into the WRDA bill
and that is what this is all about. Our intention is not to let
these things slide. We should be doing the WRDA bill every 2
years, and I think we are on schedule to do that. This is the
type of thing that we are wanting to do.
    Senator Boxer.
    Senator Boxer. Thank you. That is music to my ears, and I
hope we can avoid on either side any kind of poison pill
amendments that do not belong there. I think we have shown that
we can do that.
    So Mr. Bilodeau, do you view desal as a potential component
of a comprehensive water supply system? I have a few questions
on this, I will ask them all and then give you the time. Do you
think it should be a component--is cost a concern as you
explore the addition of desal to your water supply system?
Could Federal water infrastructure loan programs help address
some of these cost issues?
    Mr. Bilodeau. Senator Boxer, the answer is yes to all those
questions. Definitely desalination, we are looking very closely
at having that part of our portfolio of sources. Of course, we
have the Santa Ana River which is sort of our free source of
water, and we have the groundwater replenishment system as we
discussed. Desalination would be sort of the third leg to the
stool.
    Of course desalination is the most expensive, though, of
those sources. But as you mentioned, Federal loan programs
could certainly help with the cost of that.
    We are fortunate in that there are innovations taking
place, though, in that arena with membrane technology, and we
are looking forward to breakthroughs.
    Senator Boxer. Would you explain that to us in short what
that means, membrane technology?
    Mr. Bilodeau. Well, in terms of reverse osmosis, of course,
you are pulling the water molecules across a membrane. The
private sector actually, I believe Lockheed Martin is
developing a membrane called graphene. We have offered to pilot
test their technologies in our plant, to look at the effect of
it. Because we are very excited about these innovations, and we
want to push those forward, because they are going to have
worldwide implications and hopefully drive down the cost of
that water.
    To put it in perspective, the water that we produce in our
groundwater replenishment system the non-subsidized cost is
about $850 an acre-foot whereas the cost of desalinated water
is about $1,200 an acre-foot. So it is about 50 percent more
expensive.
    Senator Boxer. I would just note, and I think my colleague
agrees, everybody needs clean water. So when you are faced with
a situation where maybe you have a water emergency, the cost
diminishes because we need it. It is the staff of life in so
many ways.
    So what we are trying to do is work with my colleague to
get a lot of my Water-21 legislation in this. I think so far it
has been great. We are looking at reauthorization of the
Desalination Act. Mr. Chairman, if we can put that in the bill,
reauthorize an act we already have, which would include desal
pilot projects, also required development of drought resilient
guidelines to help communities deal with drought, that would be
helpful. I hope we could support new grants to support
development of innovative technology and change or modify the
SRF loan program to better support innovative technologies
because we kind of haven't updated it in a while.
    Those four things, would you agree, would be a good start
for us?
    Mr. Bilodeau. Absolutely. One of the bigger challenges we
have is actually the distribution of the water because this
will be a new plant that we are looking at in Huntington Beach.
And the distribution system alone is over $100 million, just to
move the water around to where we need it. So a loan program
would be a tremendous help to us.
    Senator Boxer. How about the WIFIA program? The Chairman
and I worked together to get that done. It is based on TIFIA
which would allow you to leverage funds and get pretty much
interest-free loans. Would that be helpful as well?
    Mr. Bilodeau. Interest-free, yes, we certainly could use
that.
    Senator Boxer. Well, it is extremely low interest, because
basically the interest rate is set based on the chance that you
might default. It is very low, especially, I would say Orange
County has proven it can get out of some trouble. You did in
the worst situation after the market crash. How well I remember
that and how hard that was.
    So let me turn to Mr. Price. Do you think the U.S. should
have a greater role in water supply technology development? You
discuss in your written testimony the historic role of the U.S.
Government in developing desalination and other treatment
technologies. But you say the investment has declined, and we
are not participating in the new research as much as we were.
Is that a correct reading of what you said?
    Mr. Price. That is correct. One of the ways that I
investigated that was talking to one of the professional
journal editors to get a feel as to how the number of
scientific publications have changed over probably the last 30
or 40 years. Basically the U.S. was a leader in the science of
desalination 30 years ago. It has now dropped to maybe, it is
an order of 10, 10 times less in terms of publication than it
was in the past. I think that is probably due to the Federal
funding more than anything else.
    Senator Boxer. Well, thank you. I don't have any other
questions for the panel.
    I just want to say again to my Chairman, this is an area
where I just think the work of this committee could really
spark an entire new effort to rekindle the new technologies. We
hear of defense companies that are looking at the ways to deal
with desal. I think it is right there, and I just think a
little spark from this committee could drive change and
alleviate one of the biggest problems that we face as a Nation.
    And we always have had these issues. I know Oklahoma, my
God, when you think back in history the problems that Oklahoma
has had and California over the years with drought. This is
like buying a really good insurance policy, and while we are
doing it become a leader in the world in these technologies. So
I am excited to work with you, Mr. Chairman, and I think this
committee can really light a fire under this desal and
recycling, the kind of things we like to see happen.
    Senator Inhofe. I think that will happen, and the timing
could not be better. I know there is a simple answer to this.
    Mr. Price, when you are talking about researching it, you
have Barbara and me, and you have the big ocean out there and
we have the little Red River. Is your research into technology
and all that, will that equally apply to both? Or do you
concentrate in one area that is more advanced looming
technology in one area than the other? Or is it the same?
    Mr. Price. The technologies remain the same, but for
brackish water like the Red River, it is a lot less expensive.
It takes less energy to remove the dissolved salts because
there are fewer salts.
    Senator Inhofe. Well, Mr. Dalton, we will submit a question
for the record to get new details on how to make chloride
control construction a reality in our Area 6 that we are so
concerned about.
    Anyway, the timing is right, we are getting into our WRDA
bill. That is what this is all about, and it has been a problem
in my State for a long time, and it is one that--it would kind
of be fun to solve a problem instead of just delay it. We are
anticipating doing that.
    So I think any other comments any member of the panel would
like to share with us on this committee, while we only have the
two of us here, we have staff from all the rest of the
committee, and they are very interested in this issue. Any
other comments you want to make?
    All right, in that case we are adjourned. Thank you very
much for coming.
    Senator Boxer. Thank you so much, everybody.
    [Whereupon, at 10:57 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

                                 [all]
