
Two miners walk free from a Tasmanian goldmine after being trapped a kilometre underground, highlighting the dangers of mine work
Australian researchers are developing a computerised system that monitors the performance of miners and tells management if workers are getting tired.
The system, designed to improve safety for haul truck operators, will be discussed at the national conference of the Cooperative Research Centres Association this week, shortly after the Beaconsfield mining disaster in northern Tasmania, in which one miner was killed and two others were trapped for two weeks.
University of Sydney PhD student Stewart Worrell, who is being funded by CRCMining, says the sensing device wouldn't have made a difference in the Beaconsfield rockfall because fatigue wasn't an issue.
But he says the goldmine accident, which took the life of miner Larry Knight and trapped his workmates Brant Webb and Todd Russell, highlights the danger of working in mines.
Worrell says the technology is all about fatigue management.
He says fatigue statistics are under-reported, but US figures for 2001-2003 show there are eight fatigue-related fatalities in mines each year.
He says the system uses sensors fitted to the trucks and analyses data collected during haul operations, like the ability of the driver to keep to a straight line and driver speed.
"We have sensors attached to trucks which can monitor the truck's position on the road and detect when other trucks and vehicles are nearby," he says.
"The software analyses how a driver's performance changes over the duration of the shift and from there we can determine when there are threats and alert the driver.
"We can detect if the truck's driving off the road or if there's a potential collision.
"We might say 'this guy's driven over the centre of the road a couple of times so it's time to have a break'."
Data stored on each truck is also automatically downloaded to a central database when the haul truck returns to the drop-off area.
There, it's filtered and refined and the statistics are reported to mining management, which can then use the information to upgrade safety or predict the impact of any planned changes.
The system is already in place in two West Australian mines and other operations in Australia and internationally are considering taking it up, Worrell says.
He says the technology is particularly suited to a mining environment, which tends to be in an enclosed area, but it's also being considered for train drivers.
