
Humans may be able to understand a dog's bark because all mammals speak a universal language
What do dog barks have in common with bird tweets and human baby cries?
All appear to communicate basic emotions, such as fear, aggression and submission in somewhat the same acoustic way, according to a new study in the journal Applied Animal Behaviour Science.
The find suggests a primitive communication system may unite virtually all mammals.
The theory could help explain why previous research has found that many mammals, including humans, understand the vocalisations of different species.
For example, a study in the journal Language Communication shows young children can identify simple emotions conveyed in macaque calls.
For the recent research, Professor P&eacute;ter Pongr&aacute;cz and colleagues studied how well people could describe the emotional content of several artificially assembled bark sequences.
The barks were based on sounds made by a mudi (a Hungarian herding dog) and covered five emotional states: aggressiveness, fear, despair, playfulness and happiness.
Pongr&aacute;cz, a professor of ethology at E&ouml;tv&ouml;s Lor&aacute;nd University in Budapest, Hungary, and his team then compared the listeners' answers to the barks' acoustic features.
The scientists discovered that changes in three basic sound qualities - tone, pitch, and the time between barks - determined how listeners perceived the barks.
In general, high-pitched barks with longer intervals between each bark were rated as less aggressive than lower-pitched barks heard in frequent succession.
Just like humans
Human babies make similar changes in sound quality when they cry, except frequency range appears to be more important than pitch when they express their needs.
This link between pitch or frequency and perceived emotion appears to carry across many different species, according to Pongr&aacute;cz, who cited an earlier theory proposed by avian expert Professor Eugene Morton.
"His basic argument was that, according to the general physical laws, larger bodies emit sounds characterised by lower frequencies and these are also noisier/atonal. Thus receivers can predict the size of the sender," Pongr&aacute;cz and his team write.
"This relationship could have formed the basis of an evolutionary ritualisation process whereby low-pitched vocalisations tended to signal aggression because larger animals are more likely to win contests ... and high-pitched vocalisations became predictors of submission or friendly intent."
Since the people in the dog study also linked barks signifying despair, happiness and playfulness, the researchers suspect dogs and humans share a unique ability to communicate with one another that goes beyond the proposed universal mammal 'language'.
The scientists believe years of domestication have improved the way that dogs, versus their wolf ancestors, can communicate with us.
They point out that such communication isn't limited to vocalisations. It also includes visual signals, such as changes in looks.
Common house cats also appear to have evolved improved means of communicating with humans, according to a study conducted by Cornell University researcher Nicholas Nicastro. Cats, however, seem more intent on manipulating us.
"Though they lack language, cats have become very skilled at managing humans to get what they want - basically food, shelter and a little human affection," says Nicastro.
Alan Beck, professor and director of the Center for Human-Animal Bond at Purdue University, says that we have to be careful not to interpret behaviour according to "our projection of intent".
But he admits dogs might be able to communicate with us through their barks.
"As dogs and humans share some basic non-verbal communications, it is very possible that verbal ones also exist," Beck says.
