
Last year's Lockhart Review recommended that Australia's ban on therapeutic cloning be lifted. But the federal government has ruled out a conscience vote. So where does that leave research?
The head of the UK genetics institute that produced the world's first cloned human embryo has accused Australia of damaging the international research effort by refusing to allow therapeutic cloning.
Professor John Burn, medical director of the Institute of Human Genetics at the University of Newcastle upon Tyne, was commenting after Prime Minister John Howard ruled out a conscience vote on whether therapeutic cloning should be allowed in Australia.
"It's a cost to the international research effort because Australia's a very important component of it and it's a shame that that position's been adopted," says Burn, who is in Brisbane for the 11th International Congress on Human Genetics.
Therapeutic cloning, which involves the creation of an embryo for research and to  harvest stem cells, is distinct from reproductive cloning, which results in a human being.
Both practices are currently banned in Australia although the independent Lockhart Review last year recommended the ban on therapeutic cloning should be scrapped.
Burn's unit received Europe's first cloning licence in 2004 and researchers announced the following year that they had created a cloned embryo by somatic cell nuclear transfer.
This year his team reported they had produced mice from sperm grown from embryonic stem cells.
A shadow over stem cell research
But the UK's 2005 cloning achievement was overshadowed by South Korean Professor Woo Suk Hwang.
Hwang had apparently beaten Burn's team by claiming just months before that this  team had cloned human embryos and produced stem cell lines from them.
Hwang later admitted fabricating that claim.
The scandal was a major setback for embryonic stem cell research, Burn says.
He says it damaged the credibility of the field and had made it harder for scientists to do their work because it had brought about increased regulation and requirements.
"Although we were very pleased to have actually been the first, it did cast a huge shadow over the whole field and every paper submitted now has to be backed up with endless evidence," he says.
Prime Minister John Howard ruled out a conscience vote on therapeutic cloning over the weekend but says he is still happy to have a party room debate on the matter.
Forcing a brain drain
Burn says the Australian government is making an ill-informed and "too cautious" decision not to adopt the recommendations of the Lockhart Review.
The decision will continue to force Australia's top scientists offshore, he says.
"Clearly if people feel unable to work on a topic they will move," he says.
He says the University of Newcastle upon Tyne has formed an alliance with Melbourne's Monash University to work on embryonic stem cell research.
"It may well be that by strategic alliance the Australian scientists will find a way around the federal obstruction," he says.
Burn says the promise of stem cell research is "absolutely undeniable".
"I think if the Prime Minister approaches this in a democratic way then the vast majority of Australians would want this research to go ahead," he says.
"And I think the vast majority of Australians would say if it's OK in Britain we can't see why it's not OK in Australia."
