
Could automated answers to your IT questions help reduce frustration when things go wrong?
The next time you email the IT help desk, you may find yourself dealing with a computer, not a human.
If a new system that Australian researchers are developing takes off, 'intelligent' computers will generate their own answers to your queries.
The research by computer scientists Dr Yuval Marom and Professor Ingrid Zukerman of Monash University in Melbourne will be presented at the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Hyderabad, India next month.
"Help desk operators are generally dealing with the same thing over and over again," says Marom.
And he says many emails can be answered by mixing and matching parts of generic responses, which the researchers' software will generate.
It can also help automate answers that require a more personalised response, says Marom.
The software was developed by analysing patterns between a set of 30,000 genuine pairs of questions and answers from an email help desk and generalising relationships between them.
The emails came from the large international computer hardware company involved in the Australian Research Council Linkage grant that funded the research.
The software defines several categories of questions that can be answered by generic responses, such as standard advice on how to arrange for a computer to be repaired.
Then there are questions that require more specific answers. 
These involve the system directly matching the words in the question to answers in the database, using similar technology to Google.
But unlike Google, the customer can enter in a much longer query, describing the problem in detail and what they have already done to try and solve it.
Speed and accuracy
Marom says the benefit of automated responses is that they can be obtained at "Google speed" instead of having to wait longer for a human to get around to typing a response.
But how accurate are the answers?
Marom says the system can be set so that it only fires off an automated answer when it has a certain level of confidence the answer is accurate.
But customers will tolerate some inaccuracy or incomplete answers as long as they are sufficiently knowledgeable, he says.
For example, if the system gives the customer the right webpage for downloading some software but tells them the wrong procedure, the customer might still find the automated answer useful.
And if they get fed up they can always opt out and contact a human instead with the click a button, says Marom.
So far ratings by staff in Marom's department suggest the automated answers are pretty good when compared to the answers humans give.
But he says the next step is to evaluate the system online with a real-life email help desk.
Accuracy and jobs
Marom says that automated help desk software will cost jobs. But he says some humans will always be required to answer questions the system is not confident of answering.
Exactly how many humans will depend on where the confidence levels are set as it's a trade-off. 
If the confidence level is set too high, the system requires more humans to answer the harder questions. 
If the confidence level is set too low, it could risk annoying customers.
Marom says the system could be applied in many areas from tax queries to health queries.
Although of course, he says, the level of confidence for answering health queries would have to be pretty high.
