
Australian diggers in the trenches of Gallipoli in 1915
Australia is to be part of a major three-nation archaeological survey of the Gallipoli battlefield, researchers say.
Associate Professor Chris Mackie from the University of Melbourne says the survey will combine conventional mapping with electromagnetic surveying to produce the most comprehensive historical and archaeological study ever conducted there.
"Most of the attention in the post-war period has been on the cemeteries," he says about studies of Turkey's Gallipoli Peninsula.
"One of the things we'll be spending a great deal of time on is the mapping of the trenches to see how they cohere with surviving maps of the trenches and exploring what lies beneath."
Mackie says there's a "distinct possibility" that a wealth of material dating back to the days of antiquity lies buried beneath the battlefield, perhaps the most historically significant military site in Australia's history.
"Records from sappers dating back to 1915 mention ancient pots, ancient remains and so forth, so there could be material there," he says.
"Because we'll be using electromagnetics you're coming up with all sorts of possibilities, everything from material left behind in the battle itself to much older stuff."
The survey, which will be conducted by researchers from Australia, New Zealand and Turkey, will also aim to identify any significant trenches, command posts, outposts and key battle areas, says a spokesperson for the federal department of veterans' affairs.
"Basically [we hope to produce] a catalogue of the ones we know of and also see if there's any ones we weren't aware of," the spokesperson says.
"[The researchers] hope to get together a comprehensive record of sites, gauge their condition and also recommend any ways that we can possibly protect them and enhance them."
Will the site be dug up?
Mackie says because of the historical and cultural sensitivity of the site "there's no intention to embark on any excavation".
The veterans' affairs spokesperson says: "It's going to be fairly comprehensive archaeological historical research."
Mackie says many people are unaware of the historical importance of the region, which includes the nearby site of the ancient battle of Troy.
The project was scheduled to have started earlier this year but has been delayed by diplomatic and heritage considerations, the veterans' affairs spokesperson says.
Remains of diggers found in Belgium
Confirmation of the Gallipoli survey comes as the federal government announces that the remains of what are believed to be five Australian World War I soldiers have been found on the Western Front in Belgium during excavations for a gas line at Frenzenbergstraat in Zonnebeke.
The discovery has been reported to the Commonwealth War Graves Commission and the Office of Australian War Graves is awaiting a full report, says veterans' affairs minister Bruce Billson.
He says the government will attempt to identify the remains once a report is at hand.
