
You can lose weight on a high carbohydrate diet but not all carbs are equal
There's no difference between a low GI diet and a high protein diet when it comes to losing weight, an Australian study has shown.
The study, published in the Archives of Internal Medicine today, is the first to directly compare high protein diets and those based on foods with a low glycaemic index or GI.
But the research shows low GI diets are better than high protein diets in reducing 'bad' or LDL (low density lipoprotein) cholesterol associated with cardiovascular disease.
"In terms of weight and fat loss [a low GI diet] and [a high protein diet] were exactly the same, there was no difference in terms of weight or fat loss between those two studies," reports lead author Joanna McMillan-Price from the University of Sydney's human nutrition unit.
Professor Jennie Brand-Miller, who co-authored The Low GI Diet Revolution with McMillan, was also involved in the research.
Turning carbohydrates into glucose
Low GI diets were originally used to control diabetes because of their ability to prevent dramatic fluctuations in insulin levels. 
The body takes longer to convert low GI foods to glucose, which means glucose is released into the bloodstream more slowly, preventing spikes in insulin levels that can leave you feeling hungry and prevent the breakdown of fat.
More recently, low GI diets gained popularity among dieters, with celebrities like Kylie Minogue reported to favour low GI foods.
Highly processed, low fibre foods like white bread and soft drinks have a high GI while foods like dark whole grain breads, fruit and legumes have a low GI.
Fat or cholesterol?
The researchers put 129 overweight men and women on one of four diets for 12 weeks.
Of those four, one was low GI and another was high in protein.
At the end of the study both the low GI and high protein group had lost the same amount of weight.
A third diet, which was heavy on carbohydrates with a high GI, achieved the slowest rate of weight loss.
While LDL cholesterol "declined significantly" in the low GI group, it increased among the people on the high protein diet.
McMillan-Price says the research not only suggests that a low GI diet is the best eating choice, but it also vindicates the consumption of the right kind of carbohydrates for those wanting to lose weight.
"For so long now we've had hype that it's all about high protein and we must reduce our carbs," McMillan-Price says.
"It's been a confusing message and it's quite reassuring to hear that yes, I can eat a high carb diet as long as I'm smart about the carbs I choose."
High protein or low GI?
Dr Peter Clifton, research director at CSIRO Human Nutrition, says the study shows that both high protein and low GI diets can reduce weight.
"Certainly [the study] doesn't provide any evidence [low GI diets] are the best, they're an equivalent," says Clifton, who co-authored the bestselling CSIRO high-protein Total Wellbeing diet.
Clifton says high protein diets also provide more zinc and iron that a high carb diets, and are more likely to leave you feeling fuller for longer.
"[But the study shows that] if you don't like eating large amounts of protein then choosing low GI products is probably not bad alternative," he says.
McMillan-Price's study received funding from Meat and Livestock Australia.
