
If your sex life isn't all smiles and fireworks, are you sick or just going through a rough patch? And what's a normal sex life anyway?
Consumers are being marketed drugs for premature ejaculation without good evidence there is a medical problem to be treated, an Australian conference heard this week.
US-based psychologist and sex therapist Dr Leonore Tiefer, of the New York University School of Medicine, told the Inaugural Conference on Disease-Mongering in Newcastle this week, that premature ejaculation is "the next sexual dysfunction" to be marketed by the pharmaceutical industry.
This concerns Tiefer because she says sexual difficulties are generally not biological problems that need medical treatment.
"There's no sickness, there's no pathology, nothing is broken," she says. 
She says when men and women are counselled about what is distressing them sexually, rapid ejaculation is of low importance.
Tiefer says the way premature ejaculation is being marketed as a condition in need of treatment has "all the hallmarks of disease mongering". 
First, she says, drug company-sponsored messages in the media have led to growing public awareness that premature ejaculation is regarded as a problem by experts who are measuring it, defining it and finding cures for it.
These messages include "help-seeking" advertisements that urge people to "ask your doctor" about solutions to the problem. 
"The disease-awareness campaign is in full force at this point," says Tiefer.
What's normal?
She says as a result people are now asking doctors what the normal speed of ejaculation is, and wondering whether they meet the normal standard.
"The answer is there is no such thing as normal," she says. "There's a range. Some people are quick, some people are slow. Most people are in the middle."
She says although there are no drugs yet specifically approved to treat premature ejaculation, doctors are treating the condition with available drugs that are known to slow down the speed of ejaculation.
"Doctors are getting a lot of medical education about the off-label uses of these drugs," she says. "There are articles published, there are conferences organised around this and there are drug company-paid people going out there and saying you can use this for this."
Tiefer says health and science journalists are also writing about premature ejaculation and the help available for it.
Poorly defined
Australian sociologist Dr Ross Morrow of the University of Sydney, who also spoke at the conference, agrees premature ejaculation is a "suspicious condition".
"To me this is a condition that is a very questionable medical category," he says, adding that the condition is "poorly defined". 
He says over the years there has been an attempt to define premature ejaculation according to the amount of time that lapsed, or the number of thrusts that occurred, before ejaculation occurred, but no agreement has ever been reached.
Morrow says the American Psychiatric Association defines it as persistent and recurrent ejaculation either before a man has intercourse, during attempts at penetration or very shortly after intercourse begins, in a way that is distressing to him or his partner.
And he says the definition relies on a clinician's judgement about whether the ejaculation is occurring too soon or not.
Norms changing over time
Morrow also says norms about when men should ejaculate during coitus are constantly changing.
For example, he says, a study in 1948 by Alfred Kinsey discovered three-quarters of men ejaculated within two minutes of coitus and regarded this as acceptable.
"He didn't think that was a dysfunction," says Morrow. "He actually thought that was a sign of men being sexually responsive."
But Morrow says during the 1960s the period of time to ejaculation considered normal by experts was extended.
He says this coincided with a belief that women's lack of sexual satisfaction during intercourse could be addressed if her male partner could take longer to ejaculate.
Morrow also says different cultures have different norms about how long men should take to ejaculate, citing the case of one Melanesian culture that considers ejaculation after 15 to 30 seconds normal.
Morrow says in Australia premature ejaculation is often mentioned in the same advertisements discussing erectile dysfunction, and is sometimes referred to under the banner of "ejaculatory problems".
He says antidepressant drugs used to delay or inhibit ejaculation are being currently used in impotency clinics in Australia and sex therapists are also treating the condition using cognitive behavioural therapy.
Female premature ejaculation?
Both Tiefer and Morrow are also concerned about the notion of "rapid orgasm", the female equivalent of premature ejaculation.
"I think it's part of a transformation of sex from a subjective experience into a concrete performance, almost like a sport with rules and goals and achievement standards," says Tiefer. 
"So you can define very clearly whether your performance is up to part and in that way products can be provided for you to achieve performance ore even exceed those expectations."
