
The future looks a bit brighter for the giant panda
There are many more giant pandas than previously thought, say scientists who have been studying DNA in panda faeces. 
Professor Michael Bruford of the Cardiff University School of Biosciences and Professor Fuwen Wei of the Institute of Zoology, the Chinese Academy of Sciences led the study which is reported in the current issue of the journal Current Biology. 
The giant panda is one of the world's most elusive and endangered species. 
The traditional way to estimate panda populations is to examine the faeces for the length of bamboo it contains, Bruford says. 
Researchers would then guess the panda's age and estimate how many different pandas the faeces had come from. 
Bruford says say the new method provides more accurate estimates of panda populations.
"Without DNA profiling you are bound to under-estimate," he says. 
Bruford's team surveyed 26 square kilometres of a Chinese reserve. 
"We really combed the reserve. There were teams of people in a field walking in a line," he says. 
It was previously thought that 27 giant pandas lived there. But Buford's team now thinks there are 66.
Researchers urge against complacency
He predicts that the results would be replicated in other panda reserves. 
"Our results found that previous surveys underestimated the population by more than 50%," says Bruford. 
"These findings indicate that the species has a much better chance of long-term viability, although we must not become complacent, since the population size is still perilously low." 
Bruford warns: "We still may be only talking about a few thousand individuals. These guys are not common." 
Giant pandas' traditional homes have been the mountains of central and southern China, as well as Myanmar and Vietnam.
But their numbers have fallen to only around 1,590, according to Chinese estimates, as their natural habitats have been destroyed by humans. 
China founded its first nature reserve for giant pandas in the 1950s and now has 56 nature reserves for them, according to the Xinhua news agency. 
It also has 183 giant pandas in captivity, while others have been sent to zoos around the world.
