
Sitting in silence might be better for your heart
Turning off relaxing music and sitting in silence is better for your health, say Italian and UK researchers.
They found while slow meditative music induces a relaxing effect, it's the gap between the music that has greater benefits for your circulation system.
Dr Luciano Bernardi of the University of Pavia and colleagues report their study in a recent issue of the journal Heart.
The research was part of a wider look at how heart rate, blood pressure and breathing rate fluctuate in response to music.
Bernardi and his team asked 24 men, half practising musicians, to listen to a random series of six 2 minute musical tracks.
The tracks included raga, a type of Indian music; slow and fast classical music; techno; rap; and dodecaphonic, or 12-tone music that lacks a traditional rhythmic, harmonic and melodic structure.
The researchers then measured their heart rate, breathing, blood pressure and other indicators of arousal or relaxation.
They repeated the experiment inserting 2 minute periods of silence.
The researchers found that most of the music increased blood pressure and heart rate, with a stronger effect seen with faster music.
This effect did not appear to depend on the style of music. So, fast classical music and techno had the same effect.
Relaxing with music
Slow music produced a more relaxed affect, especially during the pauses.
But during the silent interval, study participants' heart and breathing rates and blood pressures fell further.
"[Therefore] music may give pleasure (and perhaps a health benefit) as a result of this controlled alternation between arousal and relaxation," Bernardi says.
In musicians, the silent interval also reduced activity of the sympathetic nervous system, which triggers the 'fight or flight' response. 
The musicians also had more pronounced shifts in heart rate and breathing when they heard the music, which the researcher says is probably associated with their ability to synchronise their breathing with the music phrase.
Listening to music may have effects similar to that of relaxation techniques, Bernardi and his colleagues note.
Focus then release
This generally requires a person to focus his or her attention on something and then release it.
"Appropriate selection of music, by alternating fast and slower rhythms and pauses, can be used to induce relaxation and reduce sympathetic activity and thus may be potentially useful in the management of cardiovascular disease," the researchers conclude.
