
Who's that?
Monkeys recognise each other by comparing faces to an average stored in their brains, not by memorising what every monkey looks like, scientists say.
And that probably also goes for people, explaining how humans can recognise faces in a fraction of a second, according to a study published online in the journal Nature today. 
The scientists found that a monkey's brain did not keep track of different parts of a face, storing and then accessing the information to recognise others. 
Instead it keeps a statistical average of the faces it has seen and uses it as a basis for comparison. 
"When it sees a new face it compares it to this average and then it remarks upon the differences ... and that is how the face is seen," says Dr David Leopold, of the US National Institute of Mental Health. 
"It elucidates how it is possible that you can so quickly and effortlessly, in just a few hundred milliseconds, recognise faces."
Leopold and his colleagues pinpointed the recognition system while studying neurones in an area of the brain called the inferotemporal cortex in two macaque monkeys.
The monkeys had been trained to recognise computer-generated human faces. 
The scientists monitored single neurones to understand how groups of the brain cells work together to recognise faces. 
"What we found is that the neurones in this part of the monkey's brain respond in a way that is extremely sensitive to the small differences in information between faces of different identities," says Leopold.
Average face
The activity of the neurones was monitored as the monkeys were shown an average face of a person and as it was artificially morphed to the full identity. 
"The main finding was a striking tendency for neurones to show tuning that appeared centred about the average face," Leopold says.
In psychological tests, humans identify faces in much the same way as monkeys so the researchers believe this aspect of the visual recognition system is similar in both species. 
The results suggest that monkeys, and possibly humans, are primed to recognise minute facial changes.
Facial expression is an indicator of emotion and intent, which could be crucial for survival.
