
Male satin bowerbird inspecting the decorations at his bower
Male satin bowerbirds roam the streets and countryside thieving treasures to adorn their bedrooms, Australian researchers find.
But there is no honour among thieves.
While they're out poaching, their own homes are plundered and their finest treasures, blue plastic-lined bottle tops and tail feathers, stolen.
So why do bowerbirds prefer one treasure over another?
This is the question researchers including Janine Wojcieszek, an honours student at the University of Queensland at the time of the research, wanted to find out.
Now she and her colleagues report their findings in the journal Emu: Austral Ornithology.
Male bowerbirds build stick structures that serve as the base for courtship and mating.
They decorate their bowers with colourful objects and are known to steal decorations from each other.
The male satin bowerbird (Ptilonorhynchus violaceus) is particularly drawn to blue objects and researchers hypothesise this could be for reasons of vanity or practicality.
"It's interesting that different [bowerbird] species have preferences for different colours. The species we looked at particularly like blue things, while the spotted bowerbird that is found in western Queensland prefers white, silver and pinks," says Wojcieszek.
"One theory is that the bowerbirds choose the colour that best accentuates their own colour. Because satin bowerbirds are blue, they seek blue to show themselves off." 
Another theory, and one that researchers believe is more likely, is that satin bowerbirds choose blue because that's its 'allotted' colour in the bowerbird world.
The researchers studied a male bowerbird population around the Bunya Mountains, northwest of Brisbane.
Wojcieszek labelled the contents of nearly 40 bowers and then returned each day for three months, a mating season, to see what had been added, and stolen, from the bower.
What she found was a merry-go-round of gathering and stealing.  
"Every day there were changes to the bowers. Either they had stolen something, or something had been stolen from them."
The most popular objects, and those most likely to be stolen, were items that reflected ultraviolet light.
Top of the list were tail feathers from the crimson rosella bird and plastic bottle tops lined with dark blue plastic.
While the tail feathers were stolen more than any other class of decoration, the blue bottle tops were the most popular decoration relative to their availability on bowers.
