
More search results aren't the answer. We need targeted results, experts say
Google's new search engine technology won't solve all the problems of finding what you need but it's a small step in the right direction, information retrieval experts say.
The company has paid an undisclosed amount to license a new type of search algorithm, recently designed in Australia by University of New South Wales PhD student Ori Allon.
The search tool, Orion, has been touted as the biggest thing in searching the web since the development of the Google page rank algorithm by two Stanford University researchers in the early 1980s.
Little has been disclosed about the software because of commercial confidentiality.
But the man who worked with Allon to market his research says the system will make searching the net faster and easier.
"When you put in a query it comes up with a list of associated keywords that specify your search to a greater depth," says Andrew Stead, business development manager of the NewSouth Innovations, the commercial arm of the University of New South Wales.
"It actually goes into sites and extracts ... text so you can just scroll down a single page and derive the information you were looking for.
"Traditionally you've have to click through to the site, but this means you don't have to click through and find that the site's incorrect."
Luxury cars or football?
For example, a search for a particular model of luxury car comes up with where to buy one, a review of the car itself and an overview of the car manufacturer.
Stead says the search is best suited to information-based queries, such as the rules of Australian Rules football, rather than finding the home page of the Australian Football League.
But even Stead says it's not the end step in perfecting internet searches, which some research suggests cover as little as just 5% of the web.
 "Search has got a long way to go before it's going to give us what we want and this is one step in that path," he says.
Ranking pages
Dr Peter Bailey is project leader of the CSIRO's information retrieval project and has been involved in designing a search engine designed for use within organisations.
Like Stead, he says it appears that Allon's model has gone some way to addressing one of the biggest problems of searching the internet, which is how information is ranked.
Bailey says search engines work by trawling the net for documents on public websites.
The documents are then copied to form a sort of reverse index where words are linked to massive indexes of documents.
This is why the key to successful searching is ranking the material to reflect the needs of the searcher, he says.
Bailey we're still far from the perfect search engine, and current systems only address about 5% of the problems involved in trawling the web for information.
The Holy Grail of internet searching includes tailoring searches to individuals, accessing the whole internet and providing the perfect answer, something he says may be as elusive as it is desirable.
