
The king protea, one of the largest of all South African proteas, is related to proteas throughout the southern hemisphere
The protea family spread through the southern hemisphere by riding on fragments of the ancient supercontinent Gondwana, according to a scientist who says his research deals a blow to intelligent design.
Australia's Dr Peter Weston, the principle research scientist at the National Herbarium of New South Wales, has been researching the biogeography of the family Proteaceae.
The family is common in Australia and includes waratahs, grevilleas, proteas, banksias and even macadamia trees.
Varieties are also found in South Africa, Southeast Asia, New Guinea, New Caledonia, New Zealand and Madagascar.
"Most of the areas in which they grow are pieces of ... Gondwana that started fragmenting hundreds of millions of years ago," Weston says.
"After [the idea of] continental drift became accepted in the late 1960s and early 1970s it also became accepted that the Proteaceae became primarily distributed as a result of continental drift."
Weston is looking at how species spread to different parts of the world and evolveed, and is using molecular dating, to support this hypothesis.
He will discuss his latest research in an Australian Academy of Science lecture in Canberra next month.
For example, he says his analysis shows that the ancestors of the Sydney waratah come from northern Queensland, New Guinea and as far as Peru, Ecuador, Chile and Argentina.
The research supports Darwin's theory of evolution as opposed to the view that everything was simultaneously created by an intelligent designer, Weston says.
"Life on Earth has evolved together so we've got a narrative of the history of the Earth and we've got a comparable story about the history of these plants," he says.
"If these plants hadn't evolved why would you expect this degree of agreement?"
But molecular dating by Weston and colleagues at Rhodes University in South Africa has come up with some surprises when compared with geological data on continental drift.
For example, some groups of protea found both in Australia and Africa have been dated at about 40 million years old, millions of years after Gondwana split.
This makes them too young to have arrived by continental drift because according to geological records the last time Africa was connected to the rest of Gondwana was more than 100 million years ago.
So, how did they arrive in Australia?
Weston says some protea seeds are light and aerodynamic, making it likely they were distributed on the wind.
The strange case of the macadamia tree
But more puzzling is the strange case of the macadamia.
Molecular dating shows the variety found in Africa's Western Cape split from the Australian variety about 50 million years, or 50 million years after the accepted time of continental fragmentation.
Because macadamia nuts are heavy and rock-like, it's unlikely they were carried by the wind or even floated across the ocean, Weston says.
The split also predates humans, ruling out that they were distributed by hand.
"I find it hard to explain," he admits.
Weston says while Darwin believed biogeography was a crucial test of evolution, the great naturalist didn't support continental instability.
But his friend, the British botanist Joseph Hooker, suggested as early as 1853 that Proteaceae in southern continents must have achieved their distribution through climatic and geographic conditions.
