
The project aims to collect DNA and other health information from 2 million volunteers
Researchers plan to collect blood samples and health information from every living member in Western Australia over the next few years in a move they say will create the world's biggest human genetic databank.
Professor Lyle Palmer, from the University of Western Australia Centre for Medical Research, is leading the team that will hopefully collect samples from 2 million volunteers.
Next year, the scientists hope to collect some 3500 pieces of information per person from the first 60,000-80,000 people.
Palmer told the 11th International Congress of Human Genetics Congress in Brisbane it will be the first step in the proposed Western Australia Genome Health Project, one of a number of so-called biobanks that are being established around the world.
Palmer estimates such a project would cost "several hundred million dollars" and the team will be seeking support from the federal government along the way.
"The obvious thing to do ... is to study the whole population," he says.
"We'll be doing things like full body scans on everyone, full respiratory and cardiovascular work-ups, we'll  be taking pictures of everyone's retina, [doing] hearing assessments, we'll be scanning thousands of brains.
"It's about three days of data collection on each person, some of which will happen at schools, some at home, some at central facilities."
Everyone including children will be asked to participate, Palmer says. 
Data will also be collected from indigenous Australians, although this will be done under a separate umbrella with indigenous input.
The perfect population
Palmer says Western Australia is well suited to this kind of study because it's an isolated yet outbred population with a relatively low migration rate and historically large families.
It also has extensive existing records, much of the necessary infrastructure, including the Western Australian DNA bank, and what he says is the biggest linked health database in the world.
Palmer says the rising incidence of chronic disease together with an increasingly unsustainable health system and the growth of new tools and technology has made the project not only possible but necessary.
He says national privacy legislation and beefed up genetic data protection laws, in line with the recommendation of the Australian Law Reform Commission's Essentially Yours report, will ensure privacy is safeguarded.
"You're asking people to donate their sample for ever and ever so of course you have to very carefully work through those issues and that's what we're doing at the moment," he says.
However, information will be linked to individuals via a code to ensure they can be followed up, he says.
