
Picture books help 2-3 year olds learn about the world. But are some books better than others?
Toddlers can re-enact what they see, hear and learn from picture books, new research shows.
The finding suggests that picture books may play a much greater role than simply entertaining toddlers and may help them understand the world.
Researchers from the University of Queensland and the University of Virginia publish their findings in the latest issue of the journal Developmental Psychology.
Researchers know that picture books can help 4-5 year old preschoolers with a range of literary and 'life' skills.
But it is harder to assess what 2-3 year olds learn simply because they don't have the language skills to tell us.
"So what we did in our study was to let toddlers show us what they know using a re-enactment, or imitation paradigm," says Australian author Dr Gabrielle Simcock, a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Queensland.
Researchers read toddlers a picture book that described how to make a toy rattle.
They then asked the toddlers to make a rattle using the objects supplied: a green wooden ball, a stick attached to a plastic lid and a clear plastic jar.
Some 36 children in each of three age groups (18 months, 24 months and 30 months) were read either a picture book featuring colour photographs of a rattle being made, a picture book with coloured pencil drawings of a rattle being made, or not read a book at all.
Overall, children across all groups shown the colour photograph book were more successful in their attempts to make a rattle than those shown a colour drawing book or no book.
Toddlers aged 24 months and 30 months did equally well with both versions of the book.
But the 18 month toddlers shown the colour photograph book did much better than those shown the colour drawing book.
"The 18 month children needed the representation in the book to be highly realistic and to match very closely to the real world before they could understand, while the older children were much more flexible in their ability to use the pictures."
The control group was least likely to be able to make the rattle.
Simcock says the findings are exciting, but don't mean that parents should only read their children only picture books with real-life photographs.
"I think it's through cumulative exposure to a wide range of different types of books and illustrations that children begin to abstract that the pictures in the books can represent real world things," she says.
"And not all books are informative about the real world; often they might be animals talking and doing things ... [simply to] entertain."
