
Bomb-making ingredients could be hidden in small bottles and carried on planes. Alternatively, toiletries themselves could be used to make explosives
Hair gels and lotions may have been banned from carry-on luggage as they could be assembled on board a plane to make a bomb, a US criminologist says.
Professor Alfred Blumstein from Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, who helped write a government report on threats to airlines from explosives, was speaking after UK police say they had foiled a plot to blow up aircraft flying to the US.
This prompted authorities to ban liquids, including drinks, hair gels and lotions, from carry-on baggage.
"My hunch is that the reason they are prohibiting this stuff is that it does obviously have the potential of being assembled on board so that it doesn't look like a bomb going through the x-ray machine," says Blumstein. 
Such mundane items as nail polish remover, disinfectants and hair colouring contain chemicals that can be combined to make an explosion and are not detectable by "sniffing" machines, which detect plastic explosives but are not used with all baggage. 
Explosive ingredients can be concealed in bottles or other innocent-looking containers that would pass through x-ray machines. 
That does not mean they are easy to make into bombs, cautioned Dr Neal Langerman, a San Diego consultant who is former chair of the American Chemical Society's Division of Chemical Health and Safety.
"Many of the ingredients like acetone are household chemicals," Langerman says.
But some kind of expertise is usually needed to buy peroxide that is concentrated enough to work in an explosive, he says.
Bombers who attacked London Underground trains and a bus in July 2005 used homemade peroxide-based explosives carried in backpacks. 
On-board explosives
People have tried several times to use such easily concealed explosives on aircraft.
UK-born Richard Reid was tackled by passengers in December 2001 while trying to detonate explosives stuffed in his shoes in an aircraft lavatory. 
In 1994, Islamic fundamentalists set off liquid explosives on a Japan-bound Philippine Airlines plane, killing a Japanese passenger and injuring 10 others. 
Dr Mark Ensalaco, an international terrorism expert at the University of Dayton in Ohio, says Thursday's foiled operation appears to be identical to the Japan attack. 
"I stress identical with the explosives in liquids, which appear to be assembled on the plane," Ensalaco says.
