
The epicentre of the 7.2-magnitude quake, south of the Indonesian island of Java
At least 105 people were killed when an undersea earthquake unleashed huge waves on the Indonesian island of Java, echoing the devastating 2004 Asian tsunami, the Red Cross said today. 
After a strong 7.2-magnitude quake convulsed the seabed off Java's south coast, waves up to 3 metres high wrecked buildings and sent boats crashing ashore, prompting thousands of residents to flee in panic. 
Tsunami alerts were issued for parts of Indonesia and Australia, but they did not reach the victims, as there was no early warning system working in the disaster zone, according to an official at the geophysics agency in the capital Jakarta. 
"There are 105 people dead from 10 regencies, 148 people are injured and 127 still missing," says Putu Suryawan, the official at the Indonesian Red Cross disaster centre, adding that 2875 people had been displaced from their homes.
"Possibly this number could rise because many people are still missing." 
At least five aftershocks rattled the area after the quake, which hit around 3:19 pm local time on Monday (08:19 UTC), with the epicentre in the sea off Pangandaran southeast of Jakarta, according to Indonesia's seismology centre. 
Indonesia was the nation hardest hit by the devastating December 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, which killed around 220,000 people across the region.
"We still don't have a tsunami early warning system in place," says an official at the geophysics agency in Jakarta.
Indonesia's 17,000 islands sit on the Pacific 'Ring of Fire', where the meeting of continental plates causes high volcanic and seismic activity. 
Both the Pacific Tsunami Warning Center in Hawaii and the Japan Meteorological Agency issued tsunami alerts for parts of Indonesia and Australia after the quake hit. 
A tsunami warning was also issued by local authorities for India's Nicobar islands, but no immediate damage was reported there or in Australia. 
Police on Christmas Island, an Australian territory south of Indonesia, say there was no damage there.
