
Stripes on the shoulder of this basketball jersey light up for each foul the player commits
An Australian researcher has developed a sports jersey that lights up to show players' goals or fouls, and how much time they have left to play.
The jersey is called TeamAwear and is the brainchild of design computing student Mitchell Page of the University of Sydney.
In fast-scoring games like basketball it can be quite hard to keep up-to-date with constantly changing statistics that help you understand what's going on, says Page.
While some information is posted on the scoreboard this can be difficult to look at during the game.
Page decided that displaying information on players' jerseys would be a good idea because these are at the centre of the game.
"Everyone's focus is directed towards them," he says.
And the jerseys could display real-time information on individual players that is generally not publicly available.
Page developed a basketball jersey with displays made out of electroluminescent panels that light up when electricity flow through them. These are connected by conductive thread woven into the jersey.
A microcontroller communicates via a wireless connection to a computer at the bench, where someone can input the detailed information as required.
There are four stripes over the jersey's shoulder that light up as the number of fouls increase and three bars on the side of the jersey each representing 10 goals.
Two bars on the front of the jersey warn the player when they are nearly out of time. 
One warns when the game is nearly up and the other warns when they need to shoot without incurring a penalty.
And panels on the back, mainly for the benefit of the spectators, light up to show the winning side.
Page says when players tested the jerseys they found they were comfortable to wear and improved play by giving them immediate access to more information.
He says the players found the displays intuitive and easy to understand without being distracting.
The warning lights on the front were the most important. If it was a tight game they could pick up pace. But if a player had a lot of fouls, they would have to play conservatively.
Players might also choose the displays to choose a high-scoring player to pass the ball to.
Page says the jerseys also had an unexpected effect on players' psychology.
"Athletes said they were more confident when they could see that they had high points or they could see that they were winning," he says.
The coach and referee can also use the displays to choose who to keep on the court, without having to refer to the benches and scoreboards as often, says Page.
Page says while slow sports like golf would probably not benefit from his jersey, he hopes the idea can be applied to other team activities.
He says it might be useful for emergency service personnel working in noisy, chaotic environments where verbal communication is difficult.
Teams of people with hearing disabilities, debaters and possibly even orchestra members, might also benefit from the technology, says Page.
