
Isisfordia was a small crocodile - only a metre long, weighing around 3 or 4 kilograms
A new fossil from the Age of the Dinosaurs suggests modern crocodiles first evolved in Gondwana, says an international team of palaeontologists.
The team reports on the fossilised remains of the most primitive ancestor of modern crocodiles, discovered near an outback Australian town in Queensland, in the Royal Society journal  Proceedings B today.
"Up until now, the kinds of creatures that seemed to be the ancestors, or close to the ancestors, of all modern crocodiles have come from places like Belgium, from England, from the USA," says team member Dr Paul Willis.
"So that's where we thought the group originated."
But he says the new specimen, Isisfordia duncani, shares more features in common with modern crocodiles than any specimens found in the northern hemisphere.
"It really defines that branch of crocodile evolution more clearly than anything else we've come across to date," says Willis, an honorary research associate at Sydney's University of New South Wales.
The researchers say that, at 98 to 95 million years old, Isisfordia predates modern crocodiles by about 20 million years.
"Ours is the grand-daddy of crocodiles," says Willis.
Ball and socket joints 
Modern crocodiles are defined by having ball and socket joints between their vertebrae. And Willis says this gives them a very flexible yet strong backbone.
"Crocodiles have incredible bursts of very violent energy and so you need a strong backbone to be able to withstand that," he says.
Modern crocodiles also have a hard palate that reaches right to the back of the mouth, which means they can breathe at the same time as eating something under water, says Willis.
The palate also strengthens the snout, bracing it and distributing forces when the crocodile bites something.
"Crocodile bites are second only to Tyrannosaurus as the most powerful known bites of all time," says Willis.
Willis says all these features would have given Isisfordia and its descendants greater evolutionary advantage than its predecessors in aquatic environments.
Complete skeleton
Willis and colleagues analysed two fossilised skeletons first discovered in the mid-1990s in a creek bed in Isisford, in central-western Queensland, by former deputy mayor of the town, Ian Duncan.
One specimen is almost a complete skeleton with just the snout and face of the crocodile missing. The other is a complete skull.
"Between the two we have a complete skeleton," says Willis. "We know what the whole animal looked like and it's very rare to get that."
The researchers know the two are from the same species because they have the back of the skull of both.
A small croc
Isisfordia was a small crocodile, only a metre long, weighing around 3 or 4 kilograms, says Willis.
He says it was the only known crocodile in Australia at that time and wouldn't have had much competition.
Willis says it would have lived in a swampy river delta that opened into a large inland sea and survived on eating, among other things, fish and other small vertebrates, insects and crustaceans.
Isisfordia would have been the most immediate ancestor of all modern crocodilians, says Willis.
This includes crocodiles, alligators and creatures such as gharials (long thin-snouted crocodiles that live in the Ganges River) and caimans (close relatives of alligators from South America).
Gondwana overlooked
Willis says this is not the first time that Gondwana has been overlooked as a site of evolution.
"The fossil record is loaded to the northern hemisphere because there are more sites and more people looking for fossils," he says.
"But as we're finding more fossils in the Gondwanan continents it appears that a lot of groups that we previously thought originated in the northern hemisphere - or in Laurasia - actually have older representatives here in the southern continents, and in this case in Australia."
Willis is a reporter on ABC TV's Catalyst program.
