
Landsat image of Salton Sea and Coachella Valley, Southern California - the southern San Andreas fault is shown in red 
The notorious San Andreas fault has enough pent-up energy to create a massive quake, says one seismologist, although he is not sure when the big one will occur.
Professor Yuri Fialko, of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography at La Jolla, California, reports his findings in today's issue of the journal Nature.
"The fault is accumulating stress at a high rate, but this does not suggest that a rupture is imminent," says Fialko. "When the quake will happen nobody knows." 
The San Andreas runs north-south along almost all of western California, passing through San Francisco and running just north of Los Angeles, before emerging in the far south in the San Jacinto fault. 
The land on western side of the San Andreas is heading north, while the eastern side is heading south - a movement called slip. 
But slip, between mighty opposing plates, is a rarely a smooth affair. 
The pent-up friction, when released, can cause cataclysmic earthquakes. But the threat can be eased if the energy is released in minor movements, known as creep. 
The northern segment of the fault produced the San Francisco Earthquake in 1906, and the central segment had a big quake in 1857. 
But the southern segment has not produced a great earthquake for at least 250 years, so the big question is when the next "big one" will occur there. 
Satellite images
Fialko looked at the critical question of creep in the southern section. 
He used satellite imaging from two European Space Agency satellites and data from GPS monitors deployed on the ground to get a picture of surface movement in this area from 1985 to 2005. 
Fialko says his data is more complete than that used in previous studies because measurements were taken every 20 metres instead of at ground stations 10 kilometres apart.
Sadly, for the 18 million people of the Los Angeles region, he has only bad news to offer. 
