
Scientists have made an invisibility cloak that works with microwaves. But there are many technical challenges before a cloak could work with visible light to make someone invisible
Scientists say they have found a way to hide an object from microwave radiation in a first step towards making what they hope will be an invisibility cloak.
The cloaking device is said to deflect microwaves so they flow around a 'hidden' object inside it with little distortion, making it seem as if there was almost nothing there.
Such a device could one day be used to elude radar or in wireless communications.
But the researchers, like many scientists, are not working with any particular goal in mind but hope its uses will become apparent later.
"It's not quite Harry Potter," says Professor David Smith of Duke University in North Carolina, referring to the child's fictional character who can conceal himself in a magical cloak. 
"It's not exactly perfect; we can do better. But it demonstrates the mechanism, the way the waves swirl around the centre region where you want to conceal things," says Smith, who publishes the results online today in the journal Science.
Building a cloak
Every solid object scatters radiation that hits it, from microwaves through to visible light. It is this scattering that allows objects to be seen, whether with the eye or using radar or ultrasound. 
The cloaking device manipulates this scattering effect.
It relies on new, laboratory-made materials called metamaterials, engineered composite materials whose properties can be manipulated by tweaking their structure.
For instance, metamaterials can decrease both the scattering caused by a solid object and the shadow it casts. 
In this case the cloak is quite thick, Smith says, twice as big as the 15 centimetre copper tube it hides. And the materials are arranged in concentric rings.
In May the same researchers reported their theory, and it took them just a few months to demonstrate it.
The cloak reduces both back scatter, or reflection of microwaves, and forward scatter, or shadows. 
Limitations
The cloak only works in 2D. But the researchers have already started work on a 3D version.
The cloak also only works with microwaves of a specific wavelength. And the researchers hope to broaden the range of wavelengths that it can block.
But making something invisible to the human eye would present a much greater challenge.
Such a cloak would have to simultaneously interact with all the wavelengths that make up light.
"It is very unlikely that we could do it with this technology in the visible [spectrum]," Smith says.
It would have to be scaled down to nanotechnology levels, but the metals involved behave differently on that scale, he says. 
Eluding radar
Microwave cloaks might be useful for eluding radar, says Professor Costas Soukoulis, a theorist with the US Department of Energy's Ames Laboratory in Iowa.
"This is very, very important that experiments have produced what theorists had predicted," Soukoulis told Science.
The researchers are funded by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and the design is based on a theory proposed by Professor John Pendry of Imperial College London.
