
Damaged telomeres have prevented this yeast cell from dividing. Instead, it has continuously replicated its DNA to prepare for division. This has resulted in numerous copies of DNA, seen here as multiple bright spots
An Australian-born scientist is among three researchers who have been awarded a prestigious Lasker award for the discovery of telomerase, an enzyme key to ageing and cancer.
Professor Elizabeth Blackburn, of the University of California, San Francisco, has been awarded the Lasker Award for Basic Medical Research.
She shares the award with Professor Carol Greider of Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine in Baltimore and Professor Jack Szostak of Harvard Medical School and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. 
The three predicted and discovered telomerase, an enzyme that synthesises and protects the telomeres at the ends of chromosomes.
Their discoveries laid the groundwork for studies connecting telomerase and telomeres to human cancer and age-related conditions. 
"Today, telomerase research is one of the hottest fields of biomedical science," says Dr Joseph Goldstein, who won a Lasker and a Nobel prize for helping to discover cholesterol and who chairs the Lasker jury. 
Blackburn, a stem cell scientist, was dismissed from the US President's Council on Bioethics in 2005 amid controversy over her support of embryonic stem cell research, which President George W Bush opposes.
The awards, considered the US equivalents of the Nobel prizes for medical research, carry an award of US$100,000.
The Lasker Award for Clinical Medical Research went to Aaron Beck, emeritus professor of the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, for developing cognitive therapy. 
Cognitive therapy, a type of talk therapy, can treat mental conditions such as depression, suicidal behaviour, and eating disorders.
The Lasker Award for Special Achievement in Medical Science went to Joseph Gall, of the Carnegie Institution's Department of Embryology at Baltimore, for his work as a founder of modern cell biology and an early champion of women in science. 
Gall invented a technique called in situ hybridisation, now routinely used by scientists.
"This method can pinpoint a single gene among the 30,000 present in the genomes of humans and animals," Goldstein says. 
The Lasker Awards, first presented in 1946, are administered by the Lasker Foundation.
