
Could proposed new copyright laws restrict what you can get from a Google search?
Plugging a word or phrase into a search engine may soon give you fewer results if proposed new Australian copyright laws are adopted, according to internet giant Google.
The laws could open the way for Australian copyright owners to take action against search engines for caching and archiving material, Google says in a submission to a senate committee considering the legislation.
This could potentially limit the scope of the search engine results, which the internet company describes as effectively "condemning the Australian public to the pre-internet era".
Earlier this year the federal government announced its proposed changes to copyright law, which it says are designed to keep up with the rapidly changing digital landscape.
But in the submission to the senate legal and constitutional affairs committee, senior counsel and head of public policy at Google Inc, Andrew McLaughlin, says the changes fail to take into account the realities of the way in which information is processed and provided online.
"Google believes that the bill fails significantly to bring Australia's copyright act fully into the digital age," the submission says.
The internet company wants general "safety valve" provisions, as well as specific copyright exemptions, to protect search engines from falling foul of the law. 
"Given the vast size of the internet it is impossible for a search engine to contact personally each owner of a web page to determine whether the owner desires its web page to be searched, indexed or cached," Google submits.
"If such advance permission was required, the internet would promptly grind to a halt."
Google is also concerned about the effect of the copyright laws on digitisation projects, like its book search, which allows users to download books from the internet.
 Authors, news organisations and porn sites
Dr Matthew Rimmer, a copyright law expert from the Australian National University, says Google's concerns are justified and that the current laws haven't considered the crucial role search engines play in organising and providing information.
Google has already attracted legal action from the French press agency AFP, as well as authors and publishers in the US, he says.
The internet company is also appealing a decision which found in favour of a California pornographic company's breach of copyright claim against it.
Rimmer says internet search engines could be "crippled" by the proposed copyright changes, which protect libraries, archives and research institutions but leave commercial entities like Google out in the cold.
He says this will affect the ability of search engines to engage in digitisation projects like book search, provide images, index news stories and archive web content.
"Given the amount of litigation that Google has been involved in the last year I think they've got very genuine fears that they could be subject to copyright actions in Australia," he says.
He says rather than adopting the narrow "fair use" definitions contained in the legislation, Australia should adopt a US-style open-ended fair use defence to ensure a flow of and access to information.
"In the past when Google has been sued ... one of the things it did is take down its links and content.
"Google could very well become more reluctant to provide such comprehensive image and news services ... and with geo-identification technology you can also offer certain content in some countries and not others."
A spokesperson for attorney general Philip Ruddock says the committee has received 70 submissions, including one from Google, and all would be taken into account when considering the legislation.
"We will take on board all the submissions and the committee will take their views into account when they do their report," he says.
Submissions will be discussed at a public hearing in Canberra today.
