
A relative of this ancient marine organism used to dig through the mud, forming a network of tunnels
Trilobites, the extinct marine creatures famous to fossil-hunters everywhere, may have once done digging of their own, say UK and Swedish researchers.
Rocks found in a Swedish limestone quarry contain the remains of trilobites inside networks of tunnels, which appear to have been subsurface thoroughfares for the little bug-like organisms.
"It's very rare to find a trilobite in a burrow," says Amherst College's Associate Professor Whitey Hagadorn, an expert on tracks, burrows and other 'trace' fossils that can give important clues to a long-lost species' behaviour and environment.
There's only one other such fossil known, he says, and even that one doesn't show evidence that the tunnels were much more than single-use, one-way streets that collapsed after the animals made their way through the muck.
"The fact that they form open networks, that is new and different," says Hagadorn.
Such sand-filled tunnels are common in the fossil record, he says, and have generally been attributed to soft-bodied animals that left behind no hard parts.
But in recent years, palaeontologists have begun to suspect that trilobites may have also done some digging.
Finding trilobites inside tunnel remains in Sweden's 465-million-year-old Holen limestone is, therefore, a fitting but unexpected hint about how the ubiquitous creatures fit into the Palaeozoic ocean ecosystem.
Dr Lesley Cherns of Cardiff University says these particular fossils were found by accident.
"We sat down to lunch and I noticed that there were trilobites in these burrows," says Cherns, who co-authored a paper in this month's issue of the journal Geology.
A life underground
The trilobites were probably killed by something like a sudden upwelling of oxygen-poor water or some other quick and deadly event, Cherns explains.
The tunnels were then soon buried by a thick layer of mud that sealed them off from scavengers and helped to preserve the evidence.
No-one is quite sure what the trilobites were doing underground.
They could have been hiding from the nautilus-like predators that cruised the Palaeozoic oceans, says Cherns.
Or they may have used the water flowing through the tunnels to help oxygenate their gills, like some modern lobsters do, she says.
Hagadorn has other explanations. "They could have been going down to eat, reproduce, hide ... who knows?
"Hopefully this will motivate people to go out and look for more of these."
That could eventually answer some of those questions, he says.
