
The whale had enourmous eyes and, unlike today's baleen whales, teeth to rip apart prey
A bizarre whale fossil found on a beach in southern Australia suggests that baleen whales, the filter-feeding gentle giants of the sea, were not always gentle, or giants, a researcher says.
Erich Fitzgerald, a PhD student of Monash University in Melbourne and a research associate at Museum Victoria, describes the 25 million year old discovery in the latest issue of the journal Proceedings of the Royal Society B.
The fossil, which includes a complete skull of a whale and other bones, was found in the late 1990s by teenage surfer Staumn Hunder, Fitzgerald explains.
"Luckily for science, he saw these dark brown slithers of fossilised bone," protruding from a boulder on a beach near the town of Jan Juc in coastal Victoria.
Hunder and his father delivered the boulder to Monash University more than six years ago, but little long-term research was done on it until Fitzgerald began studying it in 2003.
"Even when I'd only completed half of it, it was pretty obvious this was groundbreaking," he says.
Fitzgerald found that the fossil had specific features in the facial region and the base of the skull that marked it as a member of the baleen whale group, which today includes the enormous blue whale.
But unlike modern baleen whales, which eat by filtering tiny krill and plankton from water, the fossil whale had teeth. It also had enormous eyes.
"This animal was capturing big, single prey, which is unusual for a baleen whale," Fitzgerald says. "It used the front of its mouth to grip its prey and rip it apart."
He says it was impossible to fit the fossil whale into existing branches of the evolutionary tree based on its shape, size and characteristics.
For one thing, it was only about 3.5 metres long, roughly the same size as a bottlenose dolphin.
The smallest living baleen whale, the pygmy right whale, is normally around 7 metres long, Fitzgerald says.
"This is something completely new. This was an entirely new family, which is a rare occurrence."
This new family of small, highly predatory, toothed baleen whales has been named in honour of the town of Jan Juc and its discoverer Staumn Hunder. It is called Janjucetus hunderi.
"This essentially opens up a window on what the earliest baleen whales were like," Fitzgerald says.
"It tells us that they were truly bizarre, and living in ways completely unlike any baleen whales that have existed over the past 20 million years."
