
Hundreds of planetary nebulae with intriguing shapes like this helix nebula have been found by an Australian-led team
The discovery of over 1000 glowing planetary nebulae could help balance cosmic accounts, says an international team of astronomers.
The researchers say that their discovery could help them calculate what happens to stars' missing matter, mass that seems to be 'lost' when they die.
Dr Quentin Parker, of Australia's Macquarie University in Sydney, and colleagues, say they have found 900 new planetary nebulae in the Milky Way and 500 in the neighbouring Large Magellanic Cloud.
"Planetary nebulae are the death throes of stars," says Parker, who is also with the Anglo-Australian Observatory. 
They are glowing regions of ionised gas that average-sized stars like our Sun throw off when they get old.
The gas the dying star ejects interacts with the environment around it, such as the interstellar medium, to form weird and wonderful shapes.
These have been given names like the cat's eye, hourglass, helix, ant and red spider.
Missing matter
Studying planetary nebulae helps tell us about how stars' matter is recycled from old to new stars.
Nebulae last for tens and thousands of years so it's important for astronomers to study both young and old ones. 
In general, it has been a lot easier for astronomers to find younger nebulae because they glow brighter.
But Parker and colleagues have been able to find the fainter older ones and are now confident that they have representative sample of different ages, especially of nebulae close to our Sun.
The mystery about dying stars is that they seem to lose much more mass than what appears to be thrown off in their nebulae. Some 85% of the mass appears to be unaccounted for.
Parker hope that analysing the hundreds of new nebulae discovered will help explains where the extra mass goes.
In the team's more detailed study of the Large Magellanic Cloud the team has found numerous extremely faint haloes around 60% of the planetary nebulae there.
