
Who's that? Oh, it's me
When presented with a jumbo-sized mirror, elephants recognise their reflections and investigate the inside of their mouths and ears, according to a new study.
Such self-awareness is rare. Until the paper, published online today in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, scientists believed only humans, apes and dolphins possessed self-recognition skills.
All these animals are highly intelligent and seem to feel empathy, a quality that is probably linked to self-awareness.
"What they have in common is complex sociality that includes high levels of cooperation, altruism and large brains," says co-author Dr Frans de Waal, a psychology professor at Emory University in Atlanta.
"In literature about human children, there is speculation as to how increased self-awareness makes it possible to set the self apart from others, which in turn permits the self to take the other's perspective, a prerequisite for complex forms of empathy," says de Waal, director of the Living Links Center at the university's Yerkes National Primate Research Center.
For the study, de Waal and colleagues Dr Diana Reiss and Joshua Plotnik introduced three adult female Asian elephants - Happy, Patty and Maxine - to a large mirror placed in their exhibit at the Bronx Zoo in New York City.
According to the paper, animals typically have a social response towards the reflection they see in the mirror. They then try to inspect the mirror, such as by looking behind it. Most animals, such as parrots, dogs and cats, show these behaviours.
But the three elephants had different reactions to their reflections. Each elephant played a sort of peek-a-boo by swaying their heads, trunks and bodies in and out of mirror view. They even brought food in front of the mirror and watched themselves eat.
Maxine took her trunk and stuck it in her mouth, as though she were investigating the inside of her oral cavity. She also used her trunk to pull her ear slowly forward towards the mirror.
X marks the spot
The researchers next painted two X marks on the foreheads of the elephants. One mark was invisible to control for odour and tactile cues, the other fully visible.
This 'mark test' is the scientific standard for determining whether an animal recognises itself in a mirror.
As soon as Happy saw the visible mark, she touched it with her trunk in front of the mirror. She did this 47 times. Maxine and Patty, however, ignored the marks on their foreheads.
"We believe that because elephants love to dust-bathe and throw food and dirt on their backs for storage, such a relatively small mark on their head might not bother them," says Plotnik.
"Chimpanzees and humans groom themselves by picking things off their bodies, while elephants love to be covered in dirt and mud."
Hardly surprising
Dr Lori Marino, a senior lecturer in neuroscience and behavioural biology at Emory, worked on the earlier dolphin-mirror study. 
She is not surprised that elephants can recognise themselves in the mirror.
"Like dolphins, great apes and humans, elephant brains are large and highly convoluted and their social lives are extraordinarily complex," Marino says.
She adds that many other animals possess self-awareness, a multi-faceted, complex phenomenon, which seems to manifest itself at different levels.
Since elephant self-awareness and empathy are on a similar level to that of humans, Plotnik hopes the findings will strengthen our commitment towards conservation, especially as the wild elephant population continues to plummet due to habitat loss and poaching.
