
The pharmaceutical industry wants changes in how early-stage clinical trials are run
Greater caution is needed in early stage tests of novel drugs that stimulate the immune system and only one patient should be given active medicine on the first day, a joint industry taskforce says. 
Its report was prompted after six men were left seriously ill when a clinical trial in the UK using an experimental drug went badly wrong in March.
The news triggering widespread public alarm, sending shock waves through the pharmaceuticals industry.
All six healthy volunteers were given the drug, made by German biotech firm TeGenero AG, at the same time. 
Professor Colin Dollery, a consultant to GlaxoSmithKline who co-chaired the taskforce, says tens of thousands of initial phase I trials are conducted without incident but the TeGenero episode highlightes the need for extra care with potent biotech drugs.
This is particularly the case when drugs activate biological processes in the body rather than inhibit them. 
UK regulators earlier this year concluded that TeGenero's drug TGN 1412 appeared to cause an unprecedented biological reaction in humans by stimulating the immune system, a reaction not seen in animals. 
"The great majority of drugs are antagonists, in other words, they inhibit processes," Dollery says.
"Only a minority are agonists, which activate a process. If you have a biological drug that is intended to activate the immune system, which TGN 1412 was, then you have to be very much more careful." 
Other recommendations from the taskforce, which was set up by the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry and the UK's BioIndustry Association, include improvements in ascertaining the right starting dose, 'staggered dosing' as levels are increased and only conducting such trials in hospitals with intensive care facilities.
Privately owned TeGenero filed for insolvency earlier this month as the publicity surrounding the disastrous phase I study made it impossible for the company to attract investment to keep operating. 
The trial of TGN 1412, which was designed to treat chronic inflammatory conditions and leukaemia, was conducted on behalf of TeGenero by contract research firm Parexel at Northwick Park Hospital in northwest London. 
The joint industry taskforce has submitted its conclusions to a separate, government-appointed expert committee on first-in-human clinical studies under Professor Gordon Duff, which is due to issue its report later this week.
