
The flowers on this dress open and close by themselves
A dress with animated flowers on its neckline, shirt sleeves that make sounds in tune with your body language, and a hemline with a mind of its own have been developed by a Canadian researcher.
Professor Joanna Berzowska and international colleagues will discuss these and other examples of 'wearable technology' at a workshop in Australia next year called reSkin.
Berzowska's flowery dress, named Kukkia, has a neckline with felt and silk flowers that open and close according to a special electronics embedded in the dress.
"I really wanted to make these dresses that have personalities, that move and behave almost like animals," says Berzowska, who teaches computation art at Concordia University in Montreal.
The flower petals are made of silk and felt, and contain thin wires of Nitinol, an alloy of nickel and titanium.
Nitinol is a 'shape memory alloy', which can be programmed to have different shapes at different temperatures.
When the wire heats it shrinks and pulls the petals together, closing the flower. As it cools down, the wire relaxes and the petals open.
A custom electronics board is connected by embroidered conductive thread to the flowers and makes each one open and close every 15 seconds.
The system is run on rechargeable lithium polymer batteries, originally designed for use in model aeroplanes, which are embedded in pouches in the dress.
Another dress with a mind of its own is Vilkas, which has a hemline that goes up and down on its own.
We tend to think of consumer electronics as something we can control. But Berzowska says once you turn on the microcontroller in these dresses, you have to surrender control.
"I like how perverse it is to have a piece of wearable electronics that you can't control," she says.
"Perhaps they don't do what you want them to do and they behave in unexpected ways on your body. Maybe they move at inappropriate times."
Musical pants and sound sleeves
Berzowska also has musical clothes including musical pants that make a sound every time you take a step.
"As you're walking through public space you can leave a whole trail of sounds behind you based on how you're walking," she says.
She also has 'sound sleeves' that produce different sounds to reflect the wearer's body language.
The sleeves produce a higher frequency sound the harder you squeeze your arms together.
If someone is feeling angry or threatened they cross their arms causing the sleeves to generated an almost painfully high pitch.
"But when you relax your arms the pitch goes down," says Berzowska. "It almost sounds like a cat purring."
Intimate memories
Berzowska has another outfit called Intimate Memory that record acts of physical intimacy using a microphone and a series of light-emitting diodes (LEDs) stitched in a curved line across the front. 
The LEDs light up when someone touches the skirt, whispers something in the ear of the wearer, or blows on their neck.
"The number of lights represents the intensity of the intimacy event similar to the volume indicator on a stereo," says Berzowska.
"Over time, the lights turn off, one by one, to show time elapsed since the event took place."
