
Adelaide-born Terence Tao was a full professor at the age of 24
Australian prodigy Professor Terence Tao has won the mathematics world's version of a Nobel Prize, the Fields Medal, for contributions to harmonic analysis and numerical theory.
Tao, aged just 31, wins the medal with Russian recluse Dr Grigory Perelman, Frenchman Professor Wendelin Werner and Russian Professor Andrei Okunkov. 
The medal is another claim to fame for the Adelaide-born academic who earned his PhD from Princeton University at 21 and was full professor of mathematics at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) at 24.
Asked why he devotes himself to pushing the boundaries of the discipline, Tao says: "Because it's fun." 
"What interests me is the connection between maths and the real world," he said, following an awards ceremony at the International Congress of Mathematicians in Madrid. 
Eemeritus Professor Alf van der Poorten, of the Centre for Number Theory Research at Macquarie University in Sydney, salutes Tao's achievement.
"It's a wonderful thing for Australian mathematics. He was a young genius and [Australia] had people in place to look after him. He comes back quite regularly," says van der Poorten. 
Professor John Garnett, former UCLA college chair of mathematics, recently placed Tao on a level with Mozart, "except without Mozart's personality problems".
"Mathematics just flows out of him," Garnett says. 
Tao was awarded the Fields Medal for his work on a branch of maths that uses equations from physics in the theoretical field of harmonic analysis, a discipline that focuses on acoustic wave frequencies. 
He also specialises in disciplines including algebraic geometry and number theory.
Another branch of Tao's research has been prime numbers, based on theories first put forward more than two thousand years ago by the Greek mathematician Euclid.
Russian recluse
Meanwhile Perelman, the Russian mathematician who won the medal with Tao, declined to attend the ceremony, choosing instead to stay at home and watch television.
He declined to comment on the award and on the reasons why he is shunning publicity.
Perelman resigned from the Steklov Mathematics Institute suddenly in January without explanation.
Former colleagues say they have not seen him since.
In 1996, Perelman won an award at the Second European Congress of Mathematics in Budapest. Russian newspapers say that he turned down the prize because he considered the jury insufficiently qualified. 
But Perelman's international fame in the mathematics world came in 2002 and 2003 when he published two papers online that appeared to solve the Poincar&eacute; Conjecture. 
The riddle had perplexed mathematicians since it was posited by Frenchman Henri Poincare in 1904. In just 61 pages of sketchily written notes, Perelman seemed to prove it but he never published a full proof in academic journals. 
The conjecture was one of the so-called Millenium Prize Problems for which the Clay Mathematics Institute in Boston announced a one-million-dollar prize. Perelman never picked up the prize money.
