
Be careful what you write in your blog. The boss could be watching
Bosses are considering putting specific provisions in employment contracts that could regulate what you put in your private blog or even prevent you from blogging at all, according to a new book.
A chapter on blogging and the law, written by two Australian experts, says such clauses could stop employees from referring to their workplace even when they are writing personal blogs from their own home.
"Employers are now considering including specific blogging provisions in employment contracts," the authors write in Uses of Blogs, a book to be published later this year.
"Some employers have even taken the steps to ensure that employment contracts disallow employees from blogging at all."
Co-author Damien O'Brien from the Queensland University of Technology law faculty says some workplaces have specific policies against blogging in the office but "it can get a bit blurred whether [it's] in the workplace or at home".
"Certainly some of the provisions that would be put in contracts would cover when people are blogging outside their work," he says.
The trend comes after a recent spate of cases in which employees have run into trouble over personal blogs, including a US flight attendant who was sacked for allegedly posting images of herself in uniform.
The practice of sacking people because of their blog has even got a name, doocing, after a US woman who was allegedly dismissed for writing satirical accounts of her workplace in her private blog at dooce.com.
Changing technology?
Stephen Price is the workplace relations practice leader at the Australian law firm Corrs Chambers and Westgarth and advises a number of large corporations on workplace issues.
He says concerns about blogging are related to issues like disclosure of confidential information or defamation of bosses, clients or colleagues, which originally focused on email.
"As technology has moved on that concern has highlighted new areas and one of those new areas is blogging," he says. 
Price says none of his clients has attempted to restrict employees blogging and he isn't aware of a blog-related case coming before an Australian court.
"But in the future it wouldn't surprise me," he says.
"It's pretty hard to draw up a contract that says you can't blog at home privately and have that upheld unless the person was distributing confidential information or defaming or harassing somebody, which would be covered by other provisions of the contract."
Making policy clear
Professor Brian Fitzgerald, head of law at Queensland University of Technology and a co-author of the chapter on blogging and the law, says as a so-called "disruptive technology", all parties may have to adapt to the fact that blogging is here to stay.
"Yes the law will need to adapt, yes bloggers will need to adapt but also the big players will have to adapt," he says. 
"The blogging issue is a bit like accessing websites, every workplace needs a protocol."
Uses of Blogs, to be published by the Peter Lang Publishing Group in New York, is due for international release this year.
