
The traffic lights don't need a master controller to 'tell' them when to change
A network of traffic lights that decides to turn green when lots of cars are waiting can help reduce traffic jams, say researchers.
Unlike other traffic light systems that are coordinated centrally, these lights would optimise traffic flow by acting autonomously.
Seung-Bae Cools of the Vrije Universiteit Brussel in Belgium and colleagues report their findings in a paper posted on the arXiv  preprint website.
Traffic management aims to optimise traffic flow, reduce traffic jams and cut the time drivers spend waiting at traffic lights.
Green lights are synchronised into 'green waves' to allow cars to flow through the main avenues of cities without facing a red light.
The idea is to make the speed of the green wave match the desired cruise speed for the street.
But if the green waves remain the same whatever the traffic condition, this can lead to traffic problems.
When traffic is heavy, cars entering a green wave will stop as there are cars ahead of them. And once a car misses the green wave it has to wait the whole duration of the red light to enter the next green wave. 
Self-organising traffic lights
Most advanced traffic control management systems rely on a central computer to help optimise the flow of traffic.
But the Belgian researchers have developed a system that relies on "self-organising traffic lights".
They say the system relies purely on "local interactions between cars and traffic lights" to generate "flexible green waves on demand".
At each traffic light, there is a counter that is set to zero each time a light turns red and then counts the number of cars that build up at the lights.
"If there are more cars approaching or waiting behind a red light, this will turn into green faster than if there are only few cars," say the researchers.
The researchers say the system can greatly improve traffic flow and they have tested this by feeding real traffic data from a Brussels avenue into a traffic simulator.
Adapting to traffic conditions
But Brent Stafford of Intelligent Transport Systems Australia is not convinced the system does better than the latest 'adaptive' traffic light systems.
As the name suggests, adaptive systems adjust to current traffic conditions, rather than say trigger green lights set on a timer.
One existing adaptive system, developed in Australia in the 1970s, is the Sydney Co-ordinated Adaptive Traffic System (SCATS) that now controls about 60,000 intersections in 40 countries around the world, says Stafford.
He says the Belgian researchers compared their system to a less sophisticated system to this and he is not sure how realistic the traffic simulator they used was since it is non-standard.
Panacea for traffic jams?
And other experts warn against thinking such technology can be a panacea for traffic jams.
"At the end of the day you will not be able to resolve traffic jams using just this particular concept," says traffic control engineer Professor Ljubo Vlacic of Australia's Griffith University.
The Belgian researchers agree, saying efficient traffic control should not be an excuse to keep increasing the number of cars on our roads.
They stress alternatives to private cars such as cycling, walking, car sharing and public transport play an essential role.
