
Just because you know someone well doesn't mean you can choose the right present, new research shows
If you really want an mp3 player this Christmas, but your beloved buys you a radio, don't be too disappointed.
New international research suggests knowing someone very well actually makes predicting his or her tastes more difficult.
The study, published in the December issue of the Journal of Consumer Research, goes some way to explaining why people often miss the mark and end up buying weird, inappropriate, or just plain bad gifts for the ones they love most.
Researchers from the Netherlands and Belgium invited 35 couples who had been in a relationship for at least six months to predict their partners' taste in furniture.
All 70 participants were first asked to choose their own favourite bedroom suites from 30 on offer.
Half were then asked to predict their partner's favourites while the other half were asked to predict the favourites of a stranger, person X, who in reality was their partner.
The researchers conclude that knowing a lot about your partner can actually get in the way of choosing the perfect gift.
Not only do people become overconfident that they know what their partner will like, but their tendency to assume their tastes are very similar mean they often miss the cue that they're getting it wrong.
"Our results suggest that familiarity causes [people] to put an overly heavy weight on pre-stored information," write the authors. 
"The pre-stored information that people possess about their partner is extensive. This elaborate knowledge makes predictors overly confident, such that they do not even attend to product-specific attitude feedback." 
Australian professor of psychology at the University of New South Wales, Joseph Forgas, says it's hardly surprising that people get it wrong when buying presents for others, as they often get it wrong when buying things for themselves.
The possible reason? Affluence.
"People already pretty much have everything that has real utility value for them, so most discretionary purchases are to buy items we don't really need, ie goods that have only symbolic, identity value and only minimal utility value," he says.
"Such purchases are mainly to make statements about ourselves. And people are not very good in figuring out what statement to make, and what to make it with.
"For example, some people may think that buying a red Ferrari signals power and wealth, while to others it may just signal sexual inadequacy and impotence."
