
Forget Mars this month, say astromomers. Look for Jupiter instead
A repeat of last year's spoof email promising that Mars will look as large as the Moon later this month is causing headaches for astronomers and science educators.
They say that the Mars hoax appears to be just as resilient as the Moon hoax, which denies the Moon landings ever happened. 
For instance, Jennie McCormick, education officer at Auckland's Stardome Observatory, says Stardome, like many other astronomy education centres, has been fielding numerous calls for the past fortnight from people wanting more information about the bogus event.
"The email originally dates from the 2003 opposition of Mars when the Red Planet was very bright and spectacular because it was closer to Earth than it had been for about 60,000 years," she says.
"But it certainly didn't and couldn't look as big as the Moon. You need to read the email carefully to notice that Mars would only look as big as the Moon through a telescope which had magnified it 75 times."
She says that Mars does vary in brightness as its distance from Earth changes.
"[But] without a telescope it will never look much bigger than an ordinary star."
Contrary to the email, this month Mars will be very low in the sky and only just visible in the west after sunset.
Teachers have also been fooled by the hoax.
"We've had several calls from children whose homework has been to find out what planet is going to be bigger than ever before," says McCormick.
"The hardest thing is having to disappoint children who are clearly excited by what they think they are going to see. That is the sort of thing that turns them off science, when astronomy is something that usually turns them on to it." 
However, she takes the opportunity to tell them although Mars may be disappointing this month, the giant planet Jupiter is well placed for observing.
"It's actually much more spectacular than Mars because it is bright and easy for them to find and, with good binoculars, they can see the planet with four of its moons," she says.
McCormick also tells them to check out the Bad Astronomy website, which uses science to debunk hoaxes like this.
Not everyone is as concerned as McCormick about the Mars email, like Alan MacRobert, a senior editor of Sky & Telescope magazine.
"I see it as a good thing, not a bad thing. It's an immunisation. If you make a fool of yourself by sending it to your friends and family, you'll be less likely to send them the next email chain letter you get, which may not be so harmless," he says.
