
Scientists have found the centre in the brain that controls your ability to wiggle your ears
Human ears can wiggle as well as produce their own sounds, and now researchers have a better understanding of how these unusual processes work.
Since ear wiggling involves complex coordination of facial muscles, research on it could shed light on related disorders, such as Bell's palsy, which can cause facial paralysis.
The research into sounds made by the ear, meanwhile, is surprisingly illuminating when it comes to gender and sexuality issues.
It turns out heterosexual men and women and homosexual women appear to produce different levels of ear noise.
Ear wiggling
While most of us produce sound from our ears, the ability to wiggle them in a controlled and detectable way is not as common.
"The mechanism behind ear movements is sophisticated," says Bastiaan ter Meulen, who led the ear wiggling study, accepted for publication in the journal Clinical Neurophysiology.
Unlike other facial muscles, ear muscles have their own accessory nucleus, a control area for muscle function, in the brainstem, says ter Meulen, a researcher at Erasmus MC, a university medical centre in Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
"Compared to animals, especially bats and cats, this nucleus is rather small in humans," he says.
He says that a muscle involved in eye movement also directly controls ear motion. That's why when we look left or right, our ears slightly withdraw on both sides.
Breathing and swallowing are also linked to ear movement through muscles and neuronal pathways.
Ter Meulen and team made these determinations after conducting an EEG, or brain wave test, on a 43-year-old woman who lost consciousness and experienced rhythmic bursts of ear movement.
Their study marks the first time such ear muscle activity has ever been documented in an EEG.
Noisy ears
Another team of researchers analysed noises made by the inner ear that are like echoes that occur in response to clicks, such as pencil tapping, or distortion, such as a bad radio signal.
Dr Dennis McFadden, a professor of psychology at the  University of Texas at Austin, and his colleagues, measured the strength of these otoacoustic emissions, or ear-produced sounds, in rhesus monkeys and spotted hyenas. 
Their studies have been accepted for publication in the journal Hormones and Behavior.
The scientists found that, as for humans, the sounds were stronger in females. During the breeding season, the differences between the male and female ear sounds became even more pronounced, suggesting that hormones affect the emissions.
Because male and female spotted hyenas are more androgynous when young, the researchers expected that their otoacoustic emissions would be similar. 
As predicted, measurements of the echo-like ear sounds obtained from nine male and seven female hyenas were similar.
Sexual orientation factor
In a prior study, McFadden found that the sounds produced in the inner ears of homosexual and bisexual women were weaker than those emitted from the ears of heterosexual women.
Since men also exhibit weaker echo-like sounds in the inner ear, MdFadden says the results suggest the inner ear and some unknown brain structures may play a role in sexual preference.
"The inner ear may be a valuable non-invasive window into events that occur during brain development and sexual differentiation," he says.
