
The global IWC meeting has seen a pitched battle for control of the agenda between pro-whaling nations and those who want whaling banned
Pro-whaling nations have struck an historic blow against the moratorium on commercial hunting, winning their first vote in favour of whaling for two decades.
The breakthrough came over the weekend at the 70-member International Whaling Commission's annual meeting in the Caribbean island state of St Kitts and Nevis. 
The Japan-led pro-whaling block is triumphant after forcing a resolution which brands the current ban "no longer necessary".
The non-binding resolution, which has a one vote margin, doesn't mean the 20 year-old moratorium will be overturned.
But it signals that the pro-whaling lobby might finally have the muscle to challenge the moratorium.
This is historic," says said Rune Frovik, secretary of Norwegian pro-whaling lobby the High North Alliance.
"For the first time in more than two decades the Whaling Commission expresses support for commercial whaling."
Environmentalists, meanwhile, have labelled the latest vote "tragic" and say it's their worst-ever defeat in the decades-long anti-whaling campaign.
"This is the most serious defeat the conservation cause has ever suffered at the IWC," New Zealand's environment minister Chris Clark says. 
The win is also a huge symbolic step forward for Japan, as it strives to lead pro-whaling nations to a majority on the IWC. 
Federal environment minister Ian Campbell has criticised Japan's attempt to control the IWC.
"The attempt by Japan to turn the whaling commission back into a whaling club shows just how out of touch they are with world opinion," he says.
Long awaited success or major setback?
Japan and its allies on the commission are triumphant, savouring the first-ever fruit of Tokyo's long diplomatic campaign to lift the ban on commercial whaling.
"This is an historic victory," says Glenn Inwood, spokesperson for the Japanese delegation. 
"This is the first serious setback the global moratorium has ever had. It is only a matter of time before it is gone completely." 
Environmental campaigners meanwhile are reeling from the blow, and some were close to tears after the vote.
"This is the most significant setback since (the moratorium) came into force," says Kitty Block, a lawyer with Humane Society International.
Focus on management, not conservation 
The weekend resolution, proposed by commission hosts St Kitts and Nevis, passed by 33 to 32 votes with one abstention. 
It declares "The moratorium, which was clearly intended as a temporary measure, is no longer necessary." 
