
One critic is concerned that the new packaging will make sugary soft drinks more appealing to children
Can't decide which soft drink to buy? Help may be at hand with a new drinks bottle that has flavour buttons to give you multiple choices in one container.
The programmable bottle, designed by a US company, could also improve choices for shampoos, sauces, paints and perfumes, while reducing manufacturing costs and taking up less shelf space, its developers say.
"The idea here is that the company can launch more variety, but distribute less product around the country," says Tom Woolf, president and founder of Ipifini, based in Sudbury, Massachusetts.
The concept came from software that Woolf invented, called Innovation Engine, which pulls knowledge from databases to systematically help the user improve an existing product or come up with a new idea.
When it comes to improving soft drinks, food manufacturers appeal to broad tastes. For instance, brand colas come in several flavours.
Building and operating several factory lines to accommodate each flavour is more expensive than using just one.
Distributing the variety of flavours is also a challenge. Each store needs more of one flavour than another, which can make ordering and stocking an inventory nightmare.
And although large stores may be able to accommodate all flavours, small stores usually have limited shelf space.
But the programmable bottle would require just one factory line to dispense the base flavour, such as cola. Several different flavours would be locked in sealed, plastic buttons around the edge of the bottle neck.
A customer could choose cherry cola, for example, by pressing the cherry button, squirting the flavour into the drink. To get cherry vanilla, both cherry and vanilla flavour buttons could be pressed.
Other products, such as paint, perfume, and shampoos could also offer customised colours, scents or conditioning formulas.
Drink or toy?
But the bottle may have some unintentional consequences for children.
"It's clear to me that it will be seen as a toy," says Diane Levin, professor of education at Wheelock College in Boston, and an expert in how popular culture affects child development.
"Any child looking at that bottle will want to play with the buttons," she says, pointing out that if the bottle is used for sugary soft drinks, it has the potential for luring kids into seeing junk food as something to play with.
But Woolf disagrees. "I don't think it's going to change how many people drink sugared drinks or non-sugared drinks," he says.
According to Woolf, the first use of the bottle will be for flavoured, sugarless water.
Ipifini has licenced the technology to a company that sells flavours worldwide.
