
Anti-North Korea protesters chant slogans at a protest denouncing both the North's nuclear device test, which scientists now say looks like a dud
More than two days after North Korea claimed to have exploded a nuclear weapon, scientists edged towards the conclusion that the test, if indeed nuclear, was a failure. 
But a failure is unlikely to derail North Korea's nuclear program and could even help Pyongyang's bomb makers, they warn. 
Two main sources of scientific evidence are needed to confirm that a blast is nuclear.
One is the shockwave sent back by ground detectors.
The other is fallout, radioactive particles or gases, that often escape from an underground test site, even if the tunnel or shaft is sealed tight. 
But North Korea's blast was so tiny that the seismic wave is almost indistinguishable from routine subterranean background noise, experts say. 
That means it will take a long time, harnessing supercomputers and the minds of top physicists, to find any telltale spikes that confirm the blast was nuclear, and not say a stockpile of TNT blown up as a hoax. 
"There is a series of differentiations to be done" to sift out the blast from background noise, says Xavier Clement for France's Atomic Energy Commission. 
"It is possible that this cannot be done, given the weakness of the signals compared to the background noise," he says. 
In the absence, so far, of any known radiological evidence, scientists also note the very small size of North Korea's explosion. 
Only Russia has described the blast as a full-fledged nuclear event, equivalent to 5-15 kilotonnes of TNT.
Meanwhile the Norwegian institute of seismology Norsar describes it as a "medium-sized bomb" at 1-10 kilotonnes.
But other national monitors put it at less than 1 kilotonne, with one figure as little as 200 tonnes.
Such low yields are feasible with a nuclear warhead, but they are traditionally reserved for established members of the nuclear club that have mastered arts of miniaturisation.
"The easiest size of weapon to build is 10-20 kilotonnes. It's harder to build one that's smaller, and it's harder to build one that's larger," says James Acton of Vertic, an independent UK watchdog that carries out research into the verification of international treaties.
"It seems to me technically unlikely and politically unlikely that North Korea would have tried to do anything other in its first test than in the 10-20 kilotonne range," says Acton, a Cambridge-educated nuclear physicist.
"If it was a nuclear test and the yield was less than a kilotonne, it seems to me the evidence is that this test was a fizzle, it was a partially unsuccessful test." 
Clement agrees. "If it turns out to have been a nuclear test, it's clear that the weakness of the energy release corresponds to an explosion that fell short of what could have been expected," he says. 
If the test failed, what went wrong? 
The assumption among experts is that North Korea used plutonium rather than uranium to make its bomb, given the plutonium-making reactor and fuel rods known to be in its possession. 
Uranium bombs, like Little Boy dropped on Hiroshima in 1945, are bombs that are relatively easy to make, in which a uranium slug is fired into a ball of uranium to achieve critical mass. 
But plutonium bombs are more complicated. They entail a small ball of plutonium that, like the centre of an onion, is swathed by conventional explosives. 
These explosives compress the plutonium and fire a neutron into the mass to initiate a chain reaction. 
But the explosives must be "very, very carefully shaped", and the detonation must be precisely timed to ensure that the neutron is fired at the right time, says Acton. 
Another possibility, again, still in the realm of hypothesis, is that the material used in the test had impurities of plutonium isotopes that emit neutrons and this caused the chain reaction to start prematurely. 
Whatever happened, "none of the problems are in any way terminally fatal to the program", cautions Acton. 
"They will almost certainly have gained information from this test which will have enabled them to build a better weapon next time around."
