
The Australian velvet worm Euperipatoides rowelli is a living fossil that has been puzzling researchers for years
The soft and elusive velvet worm might look like a pretty caterpillar. But its brain is strikingly similar to that of a spider, new international research shows.
The architecture of the worm's brain has more in common with a spider's brain than with the brains of other arthropods, researchers report in the journal Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences.
Velvet worms have a body formation between that of a worm and an insect and for many years scientists believed they were the 'missing link' between the two.
This view was supported not only by the way they look, but also by the fact that they date back 540 million years.
Researchers including Associate Professor David Rowell from the Australian National University in Canberra were interested in finding out whether this was true.
They found out that the worms are not a sister group of the arthropods, but lie within the arthropods and share a common ancestry.
The team catalogued aspects of the microanatomy of various arthropod brains and then loaded the information into a computer program designed to sort out molecular lineages and create a 'family tree'.
"We found the [worms] did actually fall within the arthropods and are very similar to the chelicerates [spiders and scorpions]. The brains of the velvet worms looked strikingly like spider brains," Rowell says.
"That's interesting for a number of reasons. Firstly because it's not something we've seen before, and secondly because the worms don't carry many of the body characteristics of the chelicerates and yet their brain structure suggests that they are [similar].
"We can only assume that [over time] they lost a lot of the characters that identified them as chelicerates."
Velvet worms, or onychophorans, are extremely rare and are only found along the east coast of Australia, Tasmania, New Zealand, South Africa, South America and along the tropics. 
Contrary to the way they look, they are vicious carnivores that "eat almost anything that moves", Rowell says. 
They trap their prey by firing a sticky goo over them.
