
There's no motivation to put up Arabic content on the web as there's no dedicated search engine to find it, commentators say. But that may be about to change with the launch of a new search engine later this year
Plans for a dedicated Arabic language search engine could boost the number of Arabic webpages, its developers say.
The Saudi-German search engine, called Sawafi, is planned to be launched in the last quarter of 2006.
And it could set a tough challenge for international search giants such as Google, MSN and Yahoo, which currently offer a basic Arabic search. 
"There is no [full] Arabic internet search engine on the market. You find so-called search engines, but they involve a directory search, not a local search," says Hermann Havermann, managing director of German internet tech firm Seekport.
Sawafi, working with Saudi partner Integrated Technical Solutions, is hoping to copy the success of local Chinese language search engine Baidu, which has made huge strides in a market with over 100 million users.
Everything is to play for in the Arabic speaking world of 280 million people, where internet penetration is low. There are also large communities Arabic speakers internationally.
"There are only 100 million webpages right now in Arabic, and that's nothing. It's only 0.2% of the total worldwide," Havermann says. 
Research commissioned from Dubai-based Internet researcher Madar shows the number of Arabic speaking internet users could jump to 43 million in 2008 from 16 million in 2004, Havermann says.
According to Madar, 65% of Arabic internet users in 2005 could not read English, which accounts for 70% of the material on the internet. 
Better search engines are key to a turnaround. 
"There is not enough Arabic content available on the internet. But there's no motivation to put more Arabic content on the internet as long as you don't have a system to find the content," Havermann says. 
Saudi Arabia, with an affluent population of 24 million, and Dubai in the United Arab Emirates would be key places for winning online advertising to fuel Arabic search engines. 
"Search engines are dependent on income from advertising, and for this you need partners and marketing agencies. They are in Dubai," Havermann says. "On the other side, the Arabic user market is in Saudi Arabia."
