
The way we relate to family members is culturally determined. But is this also reflected in brain activity?
The culture you are born into influences the way your brain works, an Australian conference has heard.
Juan Dominguez, a PhD student at the University of Melbourne, discussed the effects of 'enculturation' on the human brain at a recent anthropology conference in Cairns.
The researcher believes different cultures produce different brains and that cultural differences reflect different neurological functioning.
"In certain societies and cultures there are certain patterns of behaviour, people may make certain evaluations, have certain opinions, there are certain tasks that are culturally specific," he says.
"We should be able to find that ... the brain would have some sort of bias acquired through exposure to culture."
Dominguez is piloting a brain scanning study in which he will test how people from different cultures react when they are shown photos of family members.
He believes the differing kinship relations will be reflected in different types of brain activity.
Dr Douglas Lewis, a senior lecturer at anthropology who is supervising the work, acknowledges this is a controversial area.
But Lewis says there is no suggestion that one culture is "smarter" or "better" than another.
Rather, the emerging science of neuroanthropology suggests that brains within a group can be 'wired' by common experience, just as individual brains become 'wired' by individual experiences.
"What we're looking for are correlates in the brain that anthropologists have in the past thought of as being cultural or culturally mediated," he says.
Recognising faces
The study will test brain function in an Indian Tamil and an Australian of Anglo-Saxon descent.
He says while western cultures call both maternal and paternal uncles 'uncle', other cultures, including Tamil, call paternal uncles 'father' and reserve 'uncle' for maternal uncles.
"You may have a distant relationship with your father [and] a closer relationship with your uncle," Dominguez says.
"This could bias the way in which the way brain develops because the parts that modulate emotions may be engaged in certain ways."
He'll test this by showing the subjects photographs of relations and monitoring their brain activity with magnetic resonance imaging.
"We think that there will be patterns of activity that will be different," he says.
How does experience shape our brain?
Dominguez says the human brain is 'plastic' and responds to its environment in the way connections form between brain cells.
These connections are influenced by repeated patterns of thought, emotional reinforcement and even the influence of chemicals associated with stress and pleasure on the brain.
"The brain is an experience acquisition device that goes beyond genetic constraints," he says. "It is always engaged in generating and pruning connections."
Lewis says the constant process of wiring and rewiring makes every brain unique.
"The number of potential connections between neurones in the neocortex alone exceeds the number of atoms in the physical universe," he says.
"That means there are potentially that many brains ... and we're looking at certain groups or clusters."
The principle can apply to peer groups and sub-cultures as well.
"If you're hanging out with the hip-hop scene ... you're going to pick up patterns of thought, ways of thinking, expectations of other people's behaviour that are different from your next door neighbour who's a retired factory worker," he says.
