
Bacteria remove gold from soil and deposit it on grains where they live, scientists say
Australian scientists have found the strongest evidence so far that bacteria play a key role in forming gold grains and nuggets.
They have found bacteria that remove gold from the soil and deposit pure grains of it around them.
Researcher Dr Frank Reith from the CRC for Landscape Environments and Mineral Exploration, and colleagues gathered their evidence at two separate mines and publish their results today in the journal Science.
At the Tomakin mine on the south coast of New South Wales and the Hit or Miss mine in tropical north Queensland, most gold is hidden away in quartz veins, in amounts that are invisible even to high-powered microscopes.
But the soil above the mines also contains grains and nuggets of gold that have somehow found their way out of the quartz. 
"There are a probably a lot of processes involved," Reith says.
He and other scientists have long suspected that bacteria play a part, but it's an idea that has generated some scepticism.
To test the theory, Reith sifted the soil above the mines and collected gold grains 0.l-2.5 millimetres across, and then subjected them to several experiments.
First, Reith looked at the grains under a high-powered electron microscope to confirm that they contained bacteria-shaped bubbles of gold.
"They're little lumps on the surface," Reith says.
Next, he looked for organic matter on the grains, as evidence that bacteria had been growing on their surfaces. 
Finally, he used a technique called polymerase chain reaction to look for bacterial DNA on the surfaces of the grains to show that living bacteria are still there.
"The DNA would have degraded if the bacteria weren't around any more," Reith says.
About 80% of the grains had living bacteria on them, Reith says. And the only bug that was found on all those positive samples was Ralstonia metallidurans.
"These grains come from areas that are almost at the opposite ends of Australia," Reith notes. "We were pretty happy with that."
Reith thinks the Ralstonia bacteria play an important role in the microbial ecosystem in soil, helping to rid it of the soluble gold that most other species find toxic. 
"This is the guy whose job it is to get the toxic gold out of the environment so the other bacteria can live a happy life," he says.
In the future, the gold-loving bugs could prove a boon to industry, Reith says. Perhaps they could be used to improve gold processing, or even be useful as a marker for the presence of gold that's otherwise invisible.
