
Scientists are still working out how to measure objects accurately at the nanoscale
Some of the smallest things in the world are so small that not even the scientists making them know how tiny they are.
The scientists can't seem to agree how to accurately measure these nanotechnologies, which commentators say is an important step in making sure they work properly and their risk is minimised.
Accurately measuring the size of nanomaterials is crucial because nanotechnology relies on novel properties that emerge at the nanoscale.
And it's important in safety assessment because particles under a particular size may be dangerous to human or environmental health.
Dr John Miles, manager of nanometrology at Australia's National Measurement Institute in Melbourne, is one of the scientists trying to work out how to accurately measure nanotechnology, such as nanoparticles.
"Measurement at this level is an extremely difficult thing to do because it's so much smaller than the things we normally deal with, getting down to almost atomic dimensions," says Miles, who is on an international committee responsible for setting measurement standards for nanotechnologies.
But if you have an oval-shaped nanoparticle, for example, do you measure its width or length? And how do you measure a nanoparticle with a rough surface?
The shape and surface smoothness of a particle become important when measuring at the nanoscale, Miles says, because the particles themselves are about the same size as things like surface irregularities.
Depends on the lab
Miles says studies have shown that different labs, even using the same measuring technique, have delivered very different measurements of nanoparticles.
For example, nanopolystyrene spheres, which suppliers say are 80 nanometres in size, have been measured as being 15 nanometres smaller or bigger depending on who is measuring them, he says.
And measurements of silver nanoparticles have been 10 nanometres smaller or bigger, depending on the lab, says Miles. 
Nanometrologists don't yet know whether suppliers are producing unreliably-sized particles or whether those measuring them are getting it wrong.
"There is a need worldwide for a quick, convenient way of measuring nanoparticle sizes," says Miles. "If someone could come up with a way of doing that they would make a lot of money."
Scattering light
The most practical machine being developed for the job uses what is called dynamic light scattering (DLS). 
This technique shines laser light onto a solution of nanoparticles and measures their Brownian motion, the jiggling that happens when nanosized particles are bombarded by other molecules.
The smaller the particles, the more they jiggle, and the trick is to accurately calibrate their jiggling with standard metric measurements.
Miles says his institute is working on a DLS device to calibrate nanopowders as reference standards for industry. But he says the instrument is three or four years away.
Nanorulers
An alternative in the meantime is to use an electron microscope to image the particles and then a 'nanoruler' to measure them.
The problem is that this method is time-consuming because it only measures relatively few particles at a time, whereas DLS can quickly measure an entire batch of particles in one go.
There is currently no regulatory requirement for the billion-dollar nanotechnology industry to use reliable measuring devices.
