
A healthy start to the day? The way your breakfast cereal is processed may mean you can't properly extract nutrients from it
The same chemical process that makes breakfast cereal tasty can also make it less nutritious, according to a recent study.
As a result puffs contain less nutritionally available protein than flakes, researchers report in the journal Food Chemistry.
The difference is in the cooking technique, the Spanish study suggests.
In the future, the researchers say their findings may lead to healthier preparation methods for cold cereals and other processed foods.
Dr Francisco Morales, who led the research, says that a chemical process called the Maillard reaction affects both flavour and nutrition in cereals.
In the reaction, which is usually induced by heat, sugars and amino acids interact to produce odour and flavour molecules.
It's what gives many foods their characteristic toasty, golden brown qualities.
"But it also reduces bioavailability of nutrients and it can lead to the formation of contaminants," says Morales, a scientist at the Instituto del Fr&iacute;o in Madrid. 
He and his colleagues studied 60 packaged cold cereals, measuring the amount of a chemical produced during the Maillard reaction, furosine. More furosine means less nutritionally available protein.
The researchers found no significant differences among wheat, rice and corn-based cereals. 
But flaked cereals tended to have less furosine than puffed varieties. 
The manufacturing process for flakes and puffs is similar, boiling ingredients followed by drying and toasting.
But puffs need to be cooked at higher temperatures to get their characteristic airy texture. The higher temperatures fuel a stronger Maillard reaction.
Surprisingly, cereals with added dietary fibre had the highest furosine levels. 
Just a sprinkle
A separate paper published in the same journal hints at a way consumers might compensate if their favourite cereal leaves something to be desired, nutritionally.
A sprinkle of cinnamon might not improve its protein content, but it might raise its antioxidant levels.
Antioxidants help the body rid itself of free radicals, which can damage cells. Prior studies have linked free radicals to heart disease, cancer and other health problems.
Lucy Yu, a professor of nutrition and food science at the University of Maryland, and colleagues looked at the antioxidant properties of several spices and flavourings.
Cinnamon ranked first in antioxidant strength among the tested flavourings. 
Rong Tsao, one of Yu's research assistants, says, "Our findings could potentially be used for dietary supplement developers to help determine what spices and herbs could be used in their products for improved antioxidant properties."
