
Can't a man pee in peace? Not in the US, where urinals are broadcasting public health messages
If you're a man and the urinal you're standing over is talking to you, one of two things is probably happening: you're really drunk or the owner has installed a talking urinal in the bathroom.
Let's say, for your sake, it's the receptacle. Then it must be the Wizmark Urinal Communicator, a waterproof, disposable drain cover embedded with electronics that senses a visitor and then relays an audio message.
The device can be programmed to play anything from beer commercials to public service announcements promoting responsible drinking.
"It functions as a point of information and amusement for the male visitor," says its inventor Dr Richard Deutsch, a chiropractor and bioengineer, as well as the founder of US company Healthquest Technologies.
Deutsch conceived the idea while on a business trip in Washington DC. 
On a pit stop to an airport toilet, he realised that he was staring down at a drain for about the same length of time as it took to play a commercial.
He worked as an inventor for several years to develop and patent a prototype and about one year later was under way with mass production.
How does it work?
The communicator is a plastic device designed to fit over the drain of standard-sized urinals.
Not only does the device act as a deodoriser with a disinfectant base, it also contains a proximity sensor that detects someone approaching within about 30 to 60 centimetres.
A few seconds after detection flashing lights and a prerecorded audio announcement plays.
The device has a 9 centimetre diameter display area containing a lenticular screen that features multiple images or text that, as the person moves toward the urinal, appear to change from one graphic to the other.
Just in case you are drunk, the Wizmark doesn't want to let you get away without a warning. Aside from advertising, it's being used to tout anti-drink-driving, safe sex, and anti-drug messages.
Out in the field, erm, the toilet
Safety officials in Nassau County, New York, have already acquired 100 copies of the Wizmark, funded by fines from those caught driving while intoxicated, as part of a pilot program to be distributed free to bars, clubs and restaurants.
"This is perfect for the target audience we try to reach all of the time and have difficulty doing it," says Joanne McGarry, the coordinator of Nassau County's anti-drink driving program.
McGarry is asking participating store-owners to fill out a questionnaire about the Wizmark, to gather information about its usefulness.
Deutsch is also working with various states and their associated health agencies on devices featuring cartoon characters or sports heroes to promote anti-drug messages in schools.
