
Andy Roddick has the world's fastest serve at 240 kilometres an hour but the sky's the limit. Researchers say physics doesn't set an upper limit for service speed
You can reduce the number of stupid mistakes you make on the tennis court by applying the laws of physics, a US researcher says.
Professor Howard Brody of the University of Pennsylvania shows knowledge of the laws of matter and motion can lift your game in one of three main ways.
It can cut errors of latitude (hitting the ball wide), depth (hitting the net) and force (hitting the ball too hard), says Brody in the current issue of the British Journal of Sports Medicine.
Ball angle
Brody says you can reduce the risk of the ball going wide by not changing the angle when returning a shot.
"Changing the ball angle by attempting to return a cross-court shot down the line, or returning a down-the-line shot cross court is asking for lateral problems," he says.
But this doesn't mean you have to return the ball where it came from every time, he says.
If a player chooses to change the ball angle, the margin for error can be reduced by hitting the ball harder.
Graphs charting ball angle relative to force show the ball leaves the racquet at a larger angle if the swing is slow, Brody says.
"The ... statement that the angle of reflection equals the angle of incidence holds for light reflecting from a plane mirror, but not for tennis balls rebounding from a racquet," he says.
Clearing the net
A good groundstroke needs to clear the net while landing in the right place on the other side.
And there is a maximum and minimal ball angle that allows this to happen.
Using the laws of physics, a good stroke will therefore have an optimum vertical angular acceptance, which is maximum angle versus minimum angle, Brody says.
Computer analysis shows that the harder you hit the ball, the smaller the angular window of acceptance.
As ball speed increases from 80 to 96 kilometres an hour the acceptance window shrinks by 43%. The window increases as ball speed decreases.
In other words, don't hit the ball too hard if you want to get it over the net.
But this leaves players in a bind. Should they go for a fast shot, which is harder to hit but more prone to error, or a slower shot, which is likely to be more accurate but easier to return?
"The player is fighting against both geometry and Sir Isaac Newton, as well as the opponent!" Brody says.
Brody says adding spin to a fast shot can open the angular window of acceptance, because the spin acts like a downward, or Magnus force, helping gravity pull the ball onto the court.
He says physics can also be applied to improving your serve and in identifying so-called sweet spots on the racquet that will achieve minimum vibration, minimum shock and maximum ball rebound speed.
Putting it into practice
Australian Associate Professor of physics Rod Cross of the University of Sydney has written a book on the science of tennis with Brody.
He says physics can more accurately describe what happens when a player hits a ball than the player is aware of.
"The idea is that a physicist can tell a coach what the player's supposed to be doing and why, and the coach can translate that to a player," he says.
"I tried it myself. I phoned up [professional tennis player] Jelena Dokic and told her she wasn't serving properly.
"She didn't hang up straight away."
