
King penguins are keeping an eye on temperature and current flows in the Southern Ocean
Penguins and seals are swimming around the Southern Ocean with sensors superglued to their heads in the name of science, a conference will hear this week.
The animals are collecting data on water temperature and current flows, information that scientists will use to help complete global climate change models.
The research, by a team of scientists from CSIRO, the Australian Antarctic Division and the University of Tasmania, will be reported tomorrow at the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research meeting in Hobart.
"We are using the penguins and seals as oceanographic observers," says team member Dr Steve Rintoul of CSIRO and Antarctic Climate and Ecosystems CRC.
The team has recruited 15 king penguins and eight elephant seals from Macquarie Island, which is about 1300 kilometres north of the Antarctic continent.
Sensors to measure temperature, pressure and location are superglued to the animals' heads along with a radio transmitter that sends data to a satellite throughout their journey through the Southern Ocean.
As the animals dive down to catch fish, 200 metres deep in the case of penguins and 1500 metres for seals, the pressure sensors tell the scientists how deep the animals are and helps provide a profile of the sea's temperature.
When they return to their home beach on Macquarie Island the animals moult and shed the equipment, which the researchers recover. 
Making up for a northern bias
Our current knowledge about ocean temperatures has mainly come from merchant ships in the northern hemisphere, says Rintoul.
The Southern Ocean has a lot less shipping traffic and so there are relatively few measurements of ocean temperatures there.
And this, says Rintoul, is the beauty of the penguin and seal oceanographers that swim to places that are hard for scientists to get to. 
They can also deliver many more measurements.
For example, a research vessel might deliver 150 temperature profiles in a six-week trip to Antarctica whereas the 15-strong penguin team delivers 36,000 profiles over their three-week journey.
The seals dive deeper but less frequently and deliver 16,000 profiles in a six month season.
One advantage of the seals is they are bigger than the penguins, which means they can carry more equipment. 
Specifically, seals carry sensors that measure salinity, which is important for understanding the density of the ocean and calculating the specific speed of currents.
Ocean currents the key
Rintoul, a physical oceanographer and climate scientist, says the project is looking at how currents distribute heat in the ocean, a key factor in understanding climate.
"And when the heat is released back into the atmosphere it affects the climate in that location," he says.
Measurements of the ocean temperature suggests that 84% of total heat increase of the Earth in the past 50 years has been stored in the ocean, says Rintoul. 
In particular, he is studying 'fronts'. These are areas of strong current within the gigantic Antarctic Circumpolar Current, which links all the world's oceans.
"They're like rivers in the sea," he says.
By comparing maps of penguin and seal tracks with maps of the fronts, the researchers found the animals like to feed near the fronts which make them perfect spies for scientists.
