
While the rodent study appears to be successful, many safety tests would be needed before the liquid is used on humans having surgery
Biodegradable liquids that control bleeding during surgery could dramatically reduce time in the operating theatre, a study says.
Researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and the University of Hong Kong have developed a liquid composed of small protein fragments that can stop bleeding in wounded rodents within seconds.
The researchers say this is the first time that nanotechnology, technology at the atomic or molecular scale, has been used to achieve complete haemostasis, the process of stopping bleeding from a damaged blood vessel.
They say that if this success could be repeated in humans, doctors could have a new tool to combat bleeding, one of the hardest problems in surgery.
"The time to perform an operation could potentially be reduced by up to 50%," says lead author Dr Rutledge Ellis-Behnke, a research scientist at MIT.
The findings are reported in the journal Nanomedicine.
The research shows that when a liquid composed of peptides is applied to open wounds, the peptides assemble into a nanoscale protective barrier gel that seals the wound and halts bleeding.
Once the injury heals, the gel is broken down into molecules that cells can use as building blocks for tissue repair. 
Doctors currently have few effective methods to stop bleeding without causing other damage. Current tools include clamps, pressure, cauterisation and sponges.
In their experiments on hamsters and rats, the researchers applied the liquid to wounds in various types of tissue, including the brain, liver, skin, spinal cord and intestine. 
"In almost every one of the cases, we were able to immediately stop the bleeding," Ellis-Behnke says.
The researchers do not know exactly how the solution works. But they suspect that the peptides interact with the extracellular matrix around the cells rather than inducing clotting.
They say the bleeding stopped too quickly for clotting to be the cause and there were no signs of clotting, including aggregation of platelets.
