
The new spaceships are meant to replace the space shuttle fleet to be retired in 2010
Europe's first probe to the Moon crashed into the lunar surface at the weekend giving stargazers around the world an astronomical fireworks display.
Scientists hope that dust kicked up by the impact of the European Space Agency (ESA) probe will tell them more about the Moon's origin.
The SMART-1 probe smashed into a plain called the Lake of Excellence on the southwestern side of the Moon's face, "producing a more intense flash than expected", says the mission's chief scientist Professor Bernard Foing.
The craft plunged to the surface at a speed of 2 kilometres per second, throwing up a cloud of dust.
ESA estimates that the impact would leave a crater measuring 3-10 metres in diameter and 1 metre deep.
Over the past three years, operating with a full-time staff of just seven and a total budget equivalent to US$151 million dollars, the little probe has been testing new technology that one day could help put humans on Mars. 
Scientists also say that the 20,000 detailed photos transmitted by the craft will yield a fresh look at the Moon, revealing Earth's satellite as a place of surprising complexity and promise rather than a lifeless rock with little to offer except grey dust. 
"SMART-1 is the vanguard" of future space missions, says the craft's operations manager, Octavio Camino-Ramos.
"Almost everything on board was innovative. It was a mission to test technology; the science was an extra plus." 
Ion thruster
An ion thruster engine has propelled the cube, which measured just 1 metre across and weighed 350 kilograms, since it was launched in September 2003. 
The engine type has only been used once before, with the US craft Deep Space 1, launched in 1998 to rendezvous with an asteroid and then a comet. 
Ion engines are fuelled by xenon gas. The gas atoms are charged by electric guns powered by solar panels and are then expelled from the rear of the spacecraft, delivering a tiny thrust, visible as a ghostly blue glow. 
Chemical engines burn out after a couple of minutes, whereas an ion engine can push on gently for months or even years, for so long as the Sun shines and the small supply of propellant lasts. 
SMART-1 travelled 100 million kilometres but used just 80 kilograms (50 litres) of fuel, an extraordinary feat in space exploration standards.
But unlike the Deep Space mission's essentially straight-line trajectories, SMART-1 had to carry out a complex series of manoeuvres to slowly but relentlessly build up speed. 
It had to loop again and again around the Earth to gain extra speed yet also juggle with the Moon's gravitational tug, all the time using a tiny engine that delivered the same power as someone picking up an A4 sheet of paper. 
Camino says the experience was "an adventure," and compared it to navigating a small sailboat buffeted by swirling winds and currents.
But the tiny thruster needed 14 months for a trip that took Apollo only three days.
"We have shown that ion propulsion works," Camino says, predicting that this will be the thruster of choice for two ESA missions in the next decade: BepiColombo, to explore Mercury, and Solar Orbiter, which will swoop close to the Sun.
And it is also likely to be the propulsion for hauling big cargo containers to the Moon to help build the first lunar settlement, or to Mars, to support the first manned mission there, he says.
Small package
Other SMART-1 innovations are a new communications system, new-generation solar panels and a package of sensors and scanners that Foing hails as "a miracle of miniaturisation - seven instruments weighing just 19 kilos".
Weighing as little as a 10th of conventional instruments carried aboard space probes, SMART's x-ray telescope and infrared spectrometer have been carrying out the most detailed map of the Moon's elements and minerals, says Foing.
SMART-1 has also sought out locations at the lunar poles that are in permanent shade and could be worth exploring if, as some scientists hope, water exists on the Moon or just below its surface.
