
Pressure to have predictive genetic testing is coming from a surprising source, a new study shows
People are coming under more pressure from family members than doctors and even insurance agencies to have genetic tests, an Australian study reveals.
The findings are contained in the final report of the community component of the long-awaited Genetic Discrimination Project, which was presented at the 11th International Congress of Human Genetics in Brisbane today.
Chief investigator Associate Professor Sandra Taylor of Central Queensland University told the conference that 32% of respondents reported feeling as if their family had forced them to undergo predictive genetic testing, the type that gauges a person's chance of developing a disease.
"We asked people had they experienced coercion, or felt coercion in terms of undertaking testing, and most respondents answered no they had not," she says.
"When reported, however ... the category most frequently reported was within the context of the family itself, follow by doctors, genetic clinicians, researchers and insurers."
But she says family pressure doesn't necessarily refer to "coercive events", but rather people's perceptions of what's expected of them.
"So in the family context, people may feel coerced just because they want to help establish the risks of other people in the family without necessarily other family members applying pressure."
Discrimination
The study surveyed 951 adults who had tests for inherited conditions including neurological conditions, cancer and the blood disorder haemochromatosis between 1998 and 2003.
A total of 11%, or 107 of the 951 respondents, reported one or more incidents of discrimination.
Of those that had experienced discrimination, most said they experienced negative treatment by life insurers and bosses; some felt family and personal relationships were adversely affected and others felt discriminated against by healthcare providers.
The report also found that most people either didn't know where to go to complain about negative treatment or didn't want to, citing red tape and concern about consequences.
"We would think that there's a need for increased education ... about consumers rights regarding seeking review or making complaints about negative treatment," Taylor says.
However, people also said there were considerable benefits from having a test.
Genetic tests in the workplace.
Meanwhile, a separate section of the report looking at discrimination by employers and life insurance agencies found that in 92% of the cases investigated between 1999 and 2003, insurance companies had acted reasonably.
There were only three cases of apparently "unreasonable" insurance underwriting relating to people who tested positive to the breast cancer genes BRCA1 and BRCA2.
The first national study of its kind, the third-party survey also found "negligible evidence" that genetic tests were being used by the 381 employers surveyed.
None had asked for a genetic test to be done and only one employer had asked for a previous test.
However, there is strong potential for the use of genetic test information to increase in future, investigator Professor Margaret Otlowski of the University of Tasmania told the conference.
"In order for ... consumers to feel confident about that future clear guidelines must be in place," she says.
