
Locusts reach a critical point when they 'know' when to swarm
Like an army preparing for battle, locusts instinctively wait until their 'battalion' is large enough before falling into line and swarming ahead en masse, researchers find.
The apparently leaderless group will fly around chaotically until the swarm reaches a certain density of numbers, when they immediately assemble and become an orderly, collective plague.
Researchers led by Dr Jerome Buhl from Australia's University of Sydney have pinpointed this exact point of change, called the tipping point, by using statistical physics models of disordered and ordered particles.
The international team publishes its findings today in the journal Science.
The researchers assembled a circular perspex 'arena' shaped liked a Mexican hat in the laboratory.
Locusts were then released into the arena and their movements filmed as more and more locusts were added to the group.
The team found that at a low density of insects, the locusts swarmed around chaotically.
At intermediate density the locusts banded together but changed their marching directions quickly.
But when enough insects were released into the arena to reach the critical tipping point - 20 insects per square metre - the group immediately massed together and swarmed as one in a persistent direction.
Co-author Professor Steve Simpson from the University of Sydney says the statistical physics models of disordered and ordered particles used in the experiment are like dodgem cars racing around an arena.
"You give these dodgem cars a set of simple local rules. If somebody drives past them they must move and follow next to them. If they see a dodgem car a little further away then they must move towards them. If they get too close to another dodgem car they must bounce away from it," he says.
"If you scale that up to a whole bunch of dodgem cars, or particles, or locusts then as you start to add more and more to the arena, or environment, you suddenly get to a number where they all start moving in the same direction together."
Buhl says the laboratory findings reflect similar findings in the field.
He says the research, which was carried out with UK, US and Canadian researchers, could be useful in controlling pest outbreaks that devastate crops and bring disease.
