
A loophole in how people set up VoIP accounts for internet telephony is allowing fraudsters to scam people's bank account details
Fraudsters have been sending people emails asking them to phone their bank as part of a novel way of stealing account details known as 'vishing', security experts say.
Internet fraud dubbed 'phishing', where email recipients are directed to a fake website seeking their financial details, has been around for several years.
But government officials and security experts are warning about vishing, after a recent case of attempted fraud against a Californian bank.
As opposed to phishing, vishing relies on Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) telephony, a way of using the net to make cheap phonecalls.
The perpetrators take advantage of a quirk in VoIP that allows subscribers to have a telephone number that appears to be based in a city, such as Los Angeles, even though they may be anywhere in the world. 
"It's a fairly new phenomenon. We're aware of reports they have been occurring," says Lisa Hone, the assistant director of the US Federal Trade Commission's consumer protection bureau.
The perpetrator or group behind the emails sent to customers of the Santa Barbara Bank and Trust in California last month have yet to be caught, but the bank has alerted its customers to the scam.
The email sent to the bank's customers preyed on potential victims by requesting they call an apparent local telephone number to clear up an account problem. 
Any customers who called the telephone number would have heard a recorded message urging them to enter their account number, according to internet security firm Websense. 
Dan Hubbard, vice president for security research at Websense, says the group alerted the bank, a unit of Pacific Capital Bancorp. 
Pacific Bancorp could not be reached for comment, but the bank's website has alerted its customers to the scheme. 
"It's definitely a new trend. It is growing, but it is not nearly as big as the threat of [fake] websites or criminal activity through malicious code; we're talking tens of thousands versus a handful," Hubbard says.
Online auctions affected too
But he says similar scams have been attempted against users of the online payments company PayPal, and on the online auction group eBay. 
UK-based internet security firm Sophos issued an alert earlier this month about a vishing scheme targeting PayPal. 
"As hackers get smarter we are likely to see them increasingly not only set up fake websites, but 'harvest' messages from corporate switchboard systems to appear even more like the legitimate company," says Graham Cluley, a senior technology consultant at Sophos.
A VoIP-based fraud can be set up fairly simply, according to security experts. 
There are relatively few companies that currently offer such internet-based telephone services, and fewer checks are generally required compared to opening an account with a traditional telephone company. 
False voicemail
Essentially, a fraudster signs up for a VoIP account, sets up a voicemail recorded message system, mimicking that of an actual bank or other company, then mass emails consumers urging them to call the false number. 
Hone says the scam, as in the California case, can appear legitimate to unsuspecting consumers because VoIP accounts can be set up with local telephone codes of a user's choice in a variety of cities or states. 
"One VoIP account can have numbers all over the country, the code makes it look more real, and set-up is easy," Hone says.
