
The findings do not preclude the possibility of increased risk of suicide among small populations of individuals, the researchers say
Newer antidepressant drugs may not raise the risk of suicide as previously suggested, say researchers, who document a drop in suicide rates in the US since the drugs were introduced.
Dr Julio Licinio of the University of Miami and colleagues report in the June issue of the journal Public Library of Science Medicine that the new SSRI antidepressants could have saved more than 30,000 lives. 
"Our findings certainly suggest that the introduction of SSRIs has contributed to reduction of suicide rates in the United States," says Licinio who did the study while at the University of California Los Angeles.
"However, the findings do not preclude the possibility of increased risk of suicide among small populations of individuals." 
Millions of people use SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors), including Pfizer's Zoloft, GlaxoSmithKline's Paxil and the first drug of this type, Eli Lilly's Prozac, or fluoxetine.
Warnings
The US Food and Drug Administration introduced "black box warnings" on the most popular SSRIs in 2004 after studies in the US and Britain suggested the drugs may raise the risk of suicidality in children and adults.
"Although the current issue concerning antidepressants and suicidality requires further examination, we believe that many more lives have been saved than lost since the advent of these drugs," say Licinio and team. 
Suicidality is defined by feelings, thoughts, and behaviours related to suicide, but the researchers say actual deaths caused by suicide are a better measure of whether there is a benefit from antidepressants.
Licinio's team studied federal data to show the US suicide rate held steady for 15 years prior to the introduction of Prozac in 1988, then dropped steadily over 14 years as sales of the antidepressant rose. The research team found the strongest effect among women. 
Mathematical modelling of probable suicide rates from 1988 to 2002, based on pre-1988 data, suggests 33,600 fewer people have committed suicide since Prozac hit the market, Licinio says.
The actual suicide rates fluctuated between 12.2 and 13.7 suicides per 100,000 people until 1988, and then gradually fell to the lowest 10.4 per 100,000 in 2000, Licinio's team reports. 
During that time prescriptions of fluoxetine ballooned from about 2.5 million in 1988 to more than 33 million in 2002. 
Study does not prove benefit
In a commentary on the new study, Associate Professor Bernhard Baune and Professor Philippa Hay of James Cook University in Australia say the type of study performed by Lucinio and colleagues cannot prove for certain "whether antidepressants do harm or good at a population level." 
But they say that the study "does not support an association between increased suicide and increased fluoxetine prescription rates."
Licinio's team acknowledges there may have been other reasons why the suicide rate declined.
Their research was funded by the National Institutes of Health and the Dana Foundation and did not have any pharmaceutical company funding. 
The researchers declare no competing interests. Licinio accepted an offer to consult for Eli Lilly after the research was accepted for publication.
