
Scientists have found what's thought to be the first link between storms on Earth and turbulence in space
Thunderstorms on Earth can lead to storms in the outer reaches of the atmosphere that disrupt radio transmissions and other electronic communications, US researchers say.
The research, which is published in a recent issue of the journal Geophysical Research Letters, is believed to be the first time researchers have found a global link between weather on Earth and in space.
The discovery could lead to more reliable global-positioning satellite (GPS) navigation and short-wave radio transmissions by improving forecasts of high-altitude disturbances that can disrupt them, says University of California, Berkeley researcher Dr Thomas Immel. 
Using data from NASA satellites, Immel and other researchers discovered that thunderstorms over South America, Africa and Southeast Asia can create turbulence above the equator in part of the upper atmosphere known as the ionosphere.
The ionosphere is formed from solar x-rays and ultraviolet light, which break apart atoms and molecules in the upper atomosphere, creating a layer of electrically charged gas known as plasma.
The densest part of the ionosphere forms two bands of plasma close to the equator at a hight of about 400 kilometres.
These plasma bands are far too thin to be directly affected by wind from thunderstorms. But the researchers found that the wind can shape the plasma bands by generating electricity in the layer of atmosphere below them. 
Three of the densest sections of plasma were located directly above areas with frequent thunderstorms: the Amazon Basin in South America, the Congo Basin in Africa, and Indonesia.
But the researchers found another dense section of plasma above the Pacific Ocean, far from thunderstorm zones.
They say this is evidence that tropical thunderstorms have a global influence. 
That may explain why the ionosphere above North America is more turbulent than other areas, disrupting radio transmissions that travel through it. 
"We now know that accurate predictions of ionospheric disturbances have to incorporate this effect from tropical weather," Immel says. 
Researchers now hope to determine if the plasma bands shift with the seasons, or during large events like hurricanes.
