
The new test is based on a stain that detects the protein keratin. Vaginal cells, seen here, don't express the protein, giving a characteristic yellow colour. But skin cells and some mouth cells do, so they stain magenta and red
A new forensic technique that tells scientists which cells come from which parts of the body could help solve sex crimes, its developers say.
A New Zealand PhD student has found a simple way of identifying whether cell samples collected for DNA testing come from the skin, mouth or vagina.
"All it really involves is a couple of stains and some microscope slides of the cell samples and you get some lovely different coloured cells," says Claire French, from the University of Auckland.
Currently, DNA from cells found at a crime scene can link a person to the crime but cannot provide evidence about which part of the body the cells came from.
The technique French has developed involves staining epithelial cells, the outer layer of body surfaces and organs, which are easily shed or secreted.
The stain reveals different colours, corresponding to the presence of the protein keratin.
Skin cells express keratin and stain magenta; vaginal cells don't express keratin and stain orange; and cells in the mouth vary depending on their location, and stain red.
Sue Vintiner, a forensic scientist with New Zealand's Environmental Science and Research (ESR), says the technology could have practical applications.
"I've been involved in cases where we've been unable to scientifically prove that an object ... has been used to violate someone in a sexual assault or whether it was just touched by the alleged victim," she says. "Claire's work could change that."
Its developers say the technology could be used to develop a portable, histological staining kit for routine use at crime scenes and in forensic laboratories.
The research, which will soon be presented at the European Academy of Forensic Sciences conference, has received strong support from the New Zealand Police.
Claire's findings have also earned her New Zealand's McDiarmid Young Scientist of the Year Award.
The intellectual property underpinning the research has been jointly protected by ESR and the University of Auckland.
