
One day we may be able to make stronger nylon by starting at the nanoscale
A US scientist has made the world's smallest fragment of nylon and hopes to make more by harnessing the self-assembling properties of DNA.
Professor Nadrian Seeman of New York University says the long-term plan is to make ultra strong nylon.
He gave a paper on his work at the recent International Conference on Nanoscience and Nanotechnology in Brisbane.
"The same properties of DNA that make it such a wonderful genetic material can be utilised in other ways," says Seeman, a pioneer of what is called structural DNA nanotechnology.
In nature, DNA's bases enable it to pair up with and attach to another strand of DNA to form a linear double helix.
Seeman is exploiting this ability of DNA to self-assemble to make his nano-nylon.
But he is using synthetic DNA that can form branches rather than linear lines.
"You can make lattices, you can make networks, you can make objects, you can make all sorts of things with branched DNA whereas with linear DNA you're just making a long line," he says.
Seeman has been working on a synthetic version of a related molecule, RNA, which also self-assembles.
So far, he's attached chemical groups used to make nylon to fragments of synthetic RNA to make the equivalent of a single molecule of nylon.
"That's about the shortest piece of nylon you can make," he says.
He is now working on making larger pieces of nylon using DNA. The plan is to knit the nano-nylon into a form of molecular chain mail, which would make a much tougher and stronger fabric than currently exists.
But, says Seeman, this is a long-term project.
"This is very hard chemistry," he says, revealing that it took seven years to work out how to attach the nylon components to DNA.
Bottom-up assembly
Nearly 20 years ago scientists amazed the world by writing the world's tiniest corporate logo in atoms.
The tiny IBM logo was made using a large machine that laboriously placed each atom in place. 
Seeman's research is part of a different approach to assembling things at the atomic or molecular level. 
"We're talking about making things from the bottom up," he says, "unit by unit".
The approach involves mixing synthetic DNA molecules in a solution to assemble vast amounts of desired molecular structures.
Seeman says molecular self-assembly can also be used to organise nanoelectronics, an idea he first raised in 1987.
This would involve attaching molecules that conduct electricity, such as carbon nanotubes, to DNA.
So far, Seeman has demonstrated the concept by attaching gold nanoparticles to DNA.
He says his work could also be used as a tool in the imaging of biological molecules, including drug receptors, which in turn will be useful in drug design.
Seeman is funded by the National Institutes of Health, the National Science Foundation, Nanoscience Technologies Incorporated and the US military.
