
Women who believe that men are better at maths do worse in maths tests than women who don't believe the stereotype
When women believe they are genetically bad at maths, the belief becomes a self-fulfilling prophesy, research shows.
The divide between men's and women's talent at maths may therefore be due to misinformation more than genetic destiny.
A report published in the latest issue of the journal Science shows that women exposed to theories saying females are genetically bad at maths perform far worse on maths tests than women who had not been exposed to such beliefs. 
Canadian psychologists Associate Professor Steven Heine and doctoral student Ilan Dar-Nimrod, from the University of British Columbia, studied how 220 female students performed in maths tests after reading fake research reports.
The psychologists had invented the reports, which contained bogus claims about men being better at maths.
One phoney paper claimed to have discovered that the male Y chromosome gives men a 5% edge over women in maths.
Another fake paper claimed that men have a 5% edge because maths teachers stereotype girl and boy students at a very young age.
Heine says the research clearly shows that women who read the fake report about genetics did much worse in the maths test. 
The research, he says, shows that people believe they can overcome stereotyping and continue to try.
But if they blame their genetic makeup and believe they have an innate lack of ability, they give up, he says.
"People think genes are at the core of who we are," he says. "But much genetics research is still unproved. Just raising the question about genes has harmful consequences."
Often, says Heine, science about research on genes affecting gender, obesity or homosexuality is "grossly simplified" in the media. 
"The reports themselves have the potential to undermine people's motivations. If I believe that genes have a deterministic influence on my weight, will I still struggle to keep up with my diet and exercise routine?
"Genetics research is a booming industry, and every week [scientists] are identifying a new gene," he says.
But genes work in complicated ways scientists don't yet understand, he warns, and "not all scientific theories are created equal".
So-called 'brain sex', genetic differences between men's and women's brains, is a controversial research subject. 
It's so contentious that earlier this year Professor Lawrence Summers resigned as president of Harvard University amid an uproar after he suggested that women have less intrinsic ability in maths and science than men.
