
Professor Hwang Woo-suk arrives for trial to face charges of fraud and embezzlement
Disgraced stem-cell scientist Professor Hwang Woo-suk has admitted to fabricating some data that went into a landmark paper but says he was duped by junior researchers into believing the bulk of his team's findings were valid. 
Hwang, once celebrated as a national hero, was indicted in May after prosecutors said he was the mastermind of an elaborate scheme to make it look like his team had produced stem cell lines through cloning human embryos. 
"I admit to the suspicion of fabrication," he said in court as prosecutors questioned whether he personally altered parts of data for a 2005 paper to make it appear as if the team had made more stem cell lines then they had actually produced.
"It was clearly my wrongdoing, I admit it." 
Hwang has apologised previously for the discredited papers but this week offered the most detailed account of his role in data manipulations that led to the team's downfall. 
He admitted to altering a data sheet given to him by a team member to make it look like a stem cell line had been created in one experiment before the data was given to a US researcher helping to write the paper. 
Hwang also said he knew his team did not produce as many stem lines as they had claimed. 
He said he accepted responsibility for a discredited study on developing patient-specific embryonic stem cells that was published in the US journal  Science.
A separate investigation panel that debunked Hwang's papers questioned whether the team had produced any stem cell lines.
Others implicated 
He said he was unaware of much larger fabrications in data provided by some junior researchers. 
"I believed the test results brought to me by researchers that supported the findings in the papers," Hwang said. "Not all the responsibility for the fabrications lies with me."
Hwang also denied he broke a bioethics law but said his team did pay for human eggs that had been donated for his study. 
Prosecutors have charged Hwang with misusing and embezzling the equivalent of US$2.96 million (A$3.98) in state funds and private donations as well as fraud and violating bioethics laws in procuring human eggs for his research. 
Misuse of state funds carries a penalty of up to 10 years' jail, while violating the bioethics law can lead to three years' imprisonment, prosecutors say.
Emotional testimony
Hwang spoke with mounting emotion as he answered questions about the integrity of the science in his team's work. 
"We still want to believe the veracity of the stem cell lines, which we hope will be verified by a world-renowned lab, not some incompetent committee from Seoul National University," Hwang said. 
An investigation panel at Seoul National University, where Hwang once worked, said in a report in January that Hwang's team deliberately falsified key data in two papers on embryonic stem cells that have since been retracted by Science. 
In a 2004 paper, Hwang's team said it had developed stem cells from a cloned human embryo and in a 2005 paper said it had produced tailored embryonic stem cells. 
The reported breakthroughs had raised hopes because they seemed to hasten the day when genetically specific tissue could be grown from embryonic stem cells to repair damaged organs or treat diseases such as Alzheimer's.
