
Would you use car tyres made using nanotechnology?
The public has a neutral attitude towards the risk of nanotechnology and will accept some risk from specific products if their benefits are high, a new US survey has found.
The first large-scale survey of its kind is published in the current issue of the journal Nature Nanotechnology.
"Our results showed that nanotechnology was seen as relatively neutral," say Professor Steven Currall of University College London and colleagues.
The survey found people perceived nanotechnology as less risky and more beneficial than a number of other technologies such as genetically modified organisms, pesticides, chemical disinfectants and human genetic engineering. 
But they saw it as less beneficial than solar power, vaccinations, hydroelectric power and computer display screens.
The researchers also studied people's acceptance of four hypothetical nanotechnology applications - a drug, a skin lotion, car tyres and refrigerator gas coolant.
The researchers defined the environmental and health risks of each application and they found that people judged risks and benefits as a package.
"When the benefits are low, consumers are more concerned about risks than when benefits are high," they say.
The researchers say if the public is to have a measured and informed response to nanotechnology in the future, they need easy access to information on risks and benefits.
"Now is the time to educate the public aggressively with facts about the risks and benefits of nanotechnology," they say.
But Australian researcher, Dr Stephen Healy of the School of History and Philosophy of Science at the University of New South Wales, says most people don't just trade-off risks and benefits to decide whether to accept a technology.
People's trust in decision-makers also play an important role, says Healy, whose research interests include risk and public involvement in decision-making on new technologies.
He also says the researchers mistakenly suggest risks are a property of technologies themselves in isolation.
But whether or not nanoparticles present a risk, for example, will be partly determined by what people do with them, says Healy.
"It's not simply a matter of public perception and it's not simply a matter of the way they're made, it's a matter of the way they're used," he says.
Healy is not surprised the survey found the public has a neutral view on nanotechnology.
"Nanotechnology is very much an emergent technology and the existing commercial applications are very low profile to say the least," he says.
Professor Jim Falk of the Australian Centre for Science, Innovation and Society at the University of Melbourne, says the survey findings call for genuine public engagement on new technologies like nanotechnology.
"We have no national capacity in Australia for engaging the public in those issues except through the media and commissions of inquiry," he says.
Over 5500 people were involved in the web and telephone survey, which was funded by the US National Science Foundation and Rice University in Texas.
