
Antarctica is a land of extremes and researchers need time to adapt when they get there and when they return
Flying from Antarctica to Australia will get polar expeditioners home much faster than by ship, but with less time to adjust to everyday life after months of extreme conditions, say researchers.
Dr Jeff Ayton, chief medical officer of the Australian Antarctic Division in Hobart, says research on Australian soldiers during the Vietnam War suggests that a quick plane trip back could increase the challenge of adjusting to normal life.
"We know that Antarctica is a stressful environment," says Ayton, who adds that researchers can spend as long as 15 months there.
"It's characterised by isolation, confinement and extremities of conditions such as cold, darkness and lightness."
Antarctic life also has its own rhythm which is a fair bit slower than life at home.
He says that it is normal for returning Antarctic researchers to use their long ship voyage back home to reflect on their time there and what lies ahead of them.
"A ship voyage normally takes eight to 10 days, if you don't get stuck in the ice for six weeks," says Ayton.
"We have a psychologist on board to debrief wintering parties," he says. "But that is going to change when we start flying people back in four hours."
Ayton and researchers from the University of Tasmania are studying the effect of air travel to and from Antarctica as part of a larger study on factors that affect the ability of polar expeditioners to reintegrate after their research trips.
The three-year study will use the introduction of the air link in 2007/8, approved in last year's budget, to compare the impact of ship and air travel on journeys to and from Antarctica.
"With the change of logistics from ship to air we need to gain an understanding of whether that will make a difference to the reintegration," says Ayton.
He says it might be necessary for researchers to see a psychologist before they get on the plane and to get more help once they are at home.
Resilient personalities?
Ayton and colleagues are also trying to find out if researchers and their families or significant partners back home have particular psychological 'resilience' characteristics that may make reintegration more successful.
Such positive personality traits may also help researchers adapt better to the Antarctic environment in the first place.
Problems adapting to Antarctic life include sleep disturbances, fatigue, lack of motivation as well as depressive or manic tendencies that can lead to conflicts with others in the group, severe problems with work or, in the worst case, suicide. 
The research by Ayton and colleagues was presented last week at the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research meeting in Hobart.
