
It took an average of 3 to 4 months for men to regain their fertility after stopping the 'pill'. But some men had to wait as long as 2 years
Worries that the male contraceptive 'pill' may wreck a man's chance of fathering a child are unfounded, says a new study.
Men given a hormone-based contraceptive can regain their fertility about four months after stopping the treatment, researchers report today in The Lancet journal.
Drug companies have been working on a male pill or injection to inhibit sperm production and give couples a greater choice of family planning methods. 
The three main male contraceptive methods - the condom, withdrawal and vasectomy - are regarded by many as insufficiently reliable or difficult to reverse. 
The male pill uses the hormone androgen, or a mixture of androgen and progestogen, to suppress sperm production to zero or negligible levels. 
US and Australian scientists analysed studies involving men who had been given the contraceptives in trials and found the treatments were highly effective but reversible. 
"Hormonal male contraceptive methods could soon become widely available," says Dr Peter Liu currently at the ANZAC Research Institute at the University of Sydney. 
"These findings thereby increase the promise of new contraceptive drugs allowing men to share more fairly the satisfaction and burden of family planning."
Large-scale trials of male hormone-based contraceptives are being conducted in China and Europe, the scientists say.
Liu and his team analysed data on 1500 men who had taken part in 30 trials that had been published between 1990 and 2005. 
All participants recovered fertility after they stopped taking the hormones. On average, it took 3.4 months to achieve this, defined as a threshold of 20 million sperm per millilitre.
But some men took as long as two years to regain their fertility.
The researchers say various factors, including age, original sperm count, duration of treatment and ethnic origin, could influence the recovery rate.    
Two of the study authors are employed by pharmaceutical companies.
