
If all the Earth's gold was on the surface we could be "knee-deep in the stuff", says researcher
There's enough gold buried deep within the Earth's core to cover the entire land surface of the planet to a depth of half a metre, an Australian researcher says.
Professor Bernard Wood, a geologist from Macquarie University, in Sydney made his remarkable calculations based on research published in today's issue of the journal Nature.
Wood and colleagues chart the early history of our Earth's development starting with the birth of the solar system more than 4.5 billion years ago.
In particular they focus on the formation of Earth's molten metal core.
"By looking at other stars that are currently at the state our Sun was in then, we can see that they are surrounded by a flattened disc of dust and gas," Wood says. 
"We know that within about 10,000 years these formed into small bodies that were about 10 kilometres across."
Radioactive dating has shown that over the next 100,000 to one million years, those small "planetesimals" collided to form Moon-to-Mars sized planetary embryos. 
Within 10 to 100 million years, larger planets had formed. "In the case of Earth, it was around 30 million years," Wood says.
Magma ocean
Early in its history, the Earth was probably covered in a sea of molten rock, hundreds of kilometres deep. 
During the planet's development, this "magma ocean" reacted with metals in the planetesimals, extracting many of the most important and interesting elements, including gold, and eventually depositing them in the Earth's own iron-rich core. 
To calculate how much gold was in the Earth's core Wood compared the composition of the Earth's crust with that of meteorites, which can be used to represent planetesimals. 
He and other researchers have found that the meteorites had similar levels of all elements that would not normally dissolve in iron.
But they also noted that meteorites had higher levels of elements such as gold, platinum and nickel. 
"This tells us that the Earth is chemically very similar to those meteorites, but the Earth's crust is depleted in all those elements that like to dissolve in iron," Wood says.
There's only one place those elements can have gone - the molten core.
"We can say that more than 99% of the Earth's gold is in the core," Wood says. "It's a nice image to think we could all step outside and be knee-deep in the stuff."
