
Reef sharks in Australia's Great Barrier Reef are being fished to the brink of extinction, a new report suggests
Southeast Asia's voracious appetite for shark fin soup may be contributing to a dramatic drop in the number of reef sharks in Australia's Great Barrier Reef, a marine scientist says.
Dr Sean Connolly and colleagues from James Cook University found a 10-fold decrease in shark numbers in areas where fishing is allowed after conducting the first shark census in the World Heritage listed area.
The study, published in the latest issue of the journal Current Biology,  looked at two species of shark, the grey reef shark (Carcharhinus amblyrhynchos) and the whitetip reef shark (Triaenodon obesus).
The sharks were observed across four fishing management zones, ranging from strict no-entry to open fishing.
"We found [where fishing is strictly banned] shark numbers are 10 times higher than in zones where there is fishing," Connolly says.
"We can see that the populations are severely depleted already but we also have projections that say that those declines are ongoing and quite rapid." 
The study sent out divers to count shark numbers as well as using mathematical modelling taking into account births, deaths and population growth patterns.
It found whitetip reef sharks are declining at an average rate of 7% a year with a 17% rate of decline for grey reef sharks. 
The study predicts that if the trend continues populations will drop to 5% and 0.1% of what they would be without fishing.
Shark fin soup
Conolly says the results show that fishing is threatening reef sharks with ecological extinction, where their numbers will be so small they will no longer play a role in the marine ecosystem.
Some overfishing could be driven by the international market for shark fins, he says.
People fishing in certain areas of the reef are able to catch sharks and sell their fins separately, although they must bring back the carcass.
"There probably is some selling of shark fin to the international market and that pressure is likely to increase as the price for fins goes up, because there will be growing demand and an increasingly depleted shark populations," Connolly says.
Sharks are also often viewed as a pest by anglers looking for other game, such as coral trout, he says. Or they could be caught by accident.
"One of the main causes of decline in sharks is because they are what's called a bycatch species, which means you catch them by mistake when you're trying to get something else," he says.
Total landings of all shark species on the Great Barrier Reef have increased about four fold in the past 10 years, Connolly says.
Impact on the reef
Sharks sit at the top of the reef food chain but Connolly says it's hard to predict exactly how their loss would affect the coral reef ecosystem.
"Some modelling suggests that removing sharks can erode the resilience of coral reefs because if you take sharks out the smaller predators in the system could increase in number, and that could potentially decrease number of grazing seaweed eating fish," he says.
The study concludes that "immediate and substantial" reductions in shark fishing are needed for reef populations to recover.
