
Champion racehorse Phar Lap died more than 70 years ago. But a scientific test has sparked fresh debate about what caused his demise (Melbourne Museum)
Claims that champion Australian racehorse Phar Lap was killed by arsenic poisoning are premature, says an expert who has cast doubt on reports today that science has solved one of the nation's biggest sporting mysteries.
Professor Rob Lewis, director of the Monash University Centre for Synchrotron Science, says there are too many "ifs, whats and wherefores" to declare the case of Phar Lap's unexplained death shut.
Lewis, who has seen the results of synchrotron analysis of Phar Lap's hair conducted in the US, says the research is preliminary.
He says it's too early to tell whether arsenic detected in the hair is from a chemical used during the taxidermy process to preserve the horse, or the results of foul play.
Phar Lap, the 1930 Melbourne Cup champion and one of Australia's greatest sporting icons, died in 1932, shortly after winning America's richest race the Agua Caliente Handicap.
The exact cause of his death has never been proved although there was speculation it was the work of gangsters.
So Dr Ivan Kempson, a research fellow based at the University of South Australia, came up with the idea of using a synchrotron to analyse Phar Lap's hair.
"All of our analysis so far indicates that he most probably did consume a dose of arsenic just prior to his death," he says.
Kempson says analysis by the Advanced Photon Source synchrotron near Chicago shows two forms of arsenic. 
One of them, lead arsenide, could be associated with preservation, he says. But the other is more likely to be the result of ingestion.
"The other type of arsenic is consistent by its distribution and location and chemistry with him ingesting the arsenic between 30-40 hours prior to his death," he says.
"We've been going through a process of trying to prove ourselves wrong and look for alternative explanations but so far the results are consistent with him consuming arsenic." 
Horse hair samples
But Lewis says more work is needed to analyse samples from the stuffed horse, which is preserved for public display at the Melbourne Museum.
"Nobody's ever actually analysed hair from an animal that's been stuffed for this long," he says.
"What you really need to prove this kind of thing is 20 horses that were stuffed, and you check all of them and if you find a major problem in one of them you say that one's different. But in this case we've got one.
"And given that we don't actually understand exactly what procedure was used to preserve Phar Lap, how do we know whether the stuff was used in the preserving or whether it was given to him beforehand?"
Lewis says synchrotrons can closely analyse the structure of chemicals like arsenic.
"The synchrotron without any shadow of a doubt gives you more information than you could have got in other ways. But whether or not it's conclusive, would it stand up in a court of law, personally I have my doubts," he says.
"There are all sorts of things we don't quite know, we don't know the process that was used in tanning the hide, [we don't know] what has happened to the condition of that arsenic in the years since Phar Lap died. 
"Things oxidise, things change, bugs get in, all sorts of things change. Biological materials don't stay the same and clearly that sort of thing might have happened."
Kempson says more research is planned to hopefully finally lay the case to rest, including comparison with similar cases.
So far, Phar Lap's sample has only been compared with a stuffed monkey, he says. 
What is a synchrotron?
Lewis describes a synchrotron, or particle accelerator, as essentially a large x-ray machine that can concentrate a large number of x-rays onto a tiny object like a single hair.
The x-rays are produced by particles that are accelerated around a large ring at close to the speed of light. As the particles pass magnetic fields in the ring they emit rays approximately a billion times brighter than the Sun.
"In this case instead of looking at the x-rays that go straight through the hair ... you look at the x-rays that scatter off it and come off in different directions," he says.
"Those x-rays carry information about things like the arsenic and the chemistry of the arsenic."
