
Sequencing the honey bee genome could improve the search for genes linked to social behaviour
Scientists have unravelled the genetic code of the honey bee, uncovering clues about its complex social behaviour, heightened sense of smell and African origins. 
The results, published in the journal Nature, makes the bee the third insect to have its genome mapped and joins the fruit fly and mosquito in the exclusive club. 
The honey bee, or Apis mellifera, evolved more slowly than the other insects but has more genes related to smell. 
"In biology and biomedicine, honey bees are used to study many diverse areas, including allergic disease, development, gerontology, neuroscience, social behaviour and venom toxicology," says Professor Gene Robinson, director of the University of Illinois and one of the leaders of the project.
"The honey bee genome project is ushering in a bright era of bee research for the benefit of agriculture, biological research and human health," he adds. 
With its highly evolved social structure of tens of thousands of worker bees commanded by the queen, the honey bee genome could also improve the search for genes linked to social behaviour. 
But the consortium of scientists, which includes Australians, says a comprehensive analysis of the honey bee and other species will be needed to understand its social life.
The queen lives 10 times as long as workers and lays up to 2000 eggs a day. Despite having tiny brains, honey bees display honed cognitive abilities and learn to associate a flower's colour, shape and scent with food, which increases its foraging ability. 
The scientists who analysed the genetic code have discovered the honey bee originated in Africa and spread to Europe in two ancient migrations. 
"The African bees' spread throughout the New World is a spectacular example of biological invasion," the scientists write. 
The number of genes in honey bees related to smell outnumber those linked to taste. The insects also have fewer genes than the fruit fly or mosquito for immunity. 
Honey bees use pheromones, substances secreted by glands, to distinguish the gender, caste and age of other bees, according to the scientists. 
"This DNA sequence is a major step towards answering a basic question of social evolution. At the genomic level, what does it take to engineer an advanced colonial insect?" says Professor Edward Wilson, of Harvard University in a commentary on the research.
