
The double-pulsar system put Einstein's theory of general relativity through its paces, with what's believed to be the most stringent test yet
Pulses of radiation emitted from a pair of distant stars have confirmed that Einstein's theory of general relativity is at least 99.95% right, scientists say.
An international research team including scientists working at Australia's Parkes telescope measured the radiation from a 'double pulsar' system 2000 light-years away to put the theory through its paces.
According to results published online today in the journal Science, the 91-year-old theory came through with top marks.
"General relativity has passed all our tests," says co-author Dr George Hobbs from the Australia Telescope National Facility.
The double pulsar system, called PSR J0737-3039A and B, consists of two highly compact neutron stars, each of which weighs more than our own Sun but measures only about 20 kilometres across.
The two stars whirl around each other at a million kilometres an hour, emitting lighthouse-like beams of radio waves.
Researchers used three of the world's largest radio telescopes, the UK's Lovell Telescope at Jodrell Bank, the Parkes radio telescope and the Robert C Byrd Green Bank Telescope in West Virginia in the US, to observe those beams over a period of three years.
Their measurements offered a number of ways to test the accuracy of the theory of general relativity.
The most precise is called the Shapiro delay, and concerns Einstein's prediction that massive objects warp space-time.
"Einstein says that the whole concept of space and time are connected and that gravitational fields warp both of them," explains Hobbs.
This means that when one pulsar passes behind the other, its signal travels through the warped space-time created by the one in the foreground.
Using Einstein's theory, the researchers calculated that this warping would add a 90 microsecond delay to the arrival of the signal on Earth, which is just what their measurements found.
"The first thing to say is that the prediction and the measurement agree," Hobbs says.
"But it isn't possible for our measurement to be 100% precise."
What the scientists can say for certain is that Einstein's theory is accurate to at least within 0.05%.
"General relativity is used in astronomy all the time, on the assumption that it is correct," says Hobbs.
"This is the most stringent test ever made of it in the presence of a very strong gravitational field."
