
This false colour image reveals a large dust cloud in the globular cluster M15 (in red), the first time that dust has been seen there
Dawdling old stars, and not just the spectacular explosions of massive supernovae, may create much of the cosmic dust that builds generations of new stars and planets like our own, say astronomers.
The NASA Spitzer Space Telescope has spied loads of dust in what was expected to be a dust-free stellar cluster of old stars, known as M15, in the distant Pegasus cluster.
The surprising observations are pointing to a new way of looking at how the galactic star-making factories work.
It also may help explain why there's so much more cosmic dust than can be accounted for by supernovae alone.
"[It] was very surprising to see the dust there," says Chick Woodward, an astronomy professor at the University of Minnesota.
Woodward and graduate student Martha Boyer led a study of the dust, which appears in the Astrophysical Journal.
"In a sense it's a very simple observation," but one that had never been made so clearly before, says astronomer Professor Christopher Sneden of the University of Texas at Austin.
Now there is no doubt that the dust is coming from the old stars. That could help balance the galactic dust equation.
But before the researchers can even get to that, they need to explain a more fundamental mystery of M15's dust, says Woodward.
Lots of dust
According to the accepted theory, cosmic dust needs to be seeded by heavier elements like silicon, oxygen and carbon, which tend to be products of bigger, short-lived stars.
But M15's big old stars are poor in heavy elements, and there's still lots of dust.
"How do we form dust when we don't have the metals around to condense them?" says Woodward. Astronomers call all elements heavier than hydrogen and helium 'metals'.
The fact that dust could be forming in space without metals could mean astronomers may have to revise their basic theories on where and out of what sort of dust newer stars and planets form.
As for how much dust there ultimately is in the galaxy, for decades astronomers figured the dustiest places are where stars are forming as it's cosmic dust that makes stars in the first place.
They also suspected that aged stars like those in M15 lose mass to space, but had not witnessed it taking the form of dust until now.
One reason the dust from old stars has been elusive, says Woodward, is that the stars are in clusters that formed at the same time as the Milky Way, 12.5 billion years ago.
That's an awful lot of time for the clusters to bob up and down like a dolphin through the galactic plane.
Spring cleaning the cosmos
On each pass the clusters probably get a good scouring, a sort of spring clean in which the galactic wind clears away the dust.
"[The periodic cleaning] helps explain why people haven't seen it in the past," says Sneden of the dust around old stars.
One of the next steps, says Sneden, will be to look for more cases like M15, just to make sure it's not a fluke.
"I'd like to know how common this is," he says.
