
Antechinus females go to extraordinary lengths to make sure their offspring survive
Some female marsupials have sex with as many males as possible to produce the fittest and healthiest offspring, Australian researchers report.
The brown antechinus (Antechinus stuartii) usually only breeds once in her life, so she has added pressure to make sure her young have the best chance of surviving.
Researchers report in today's issue of the journal Nature how the mouse-like marsupial stores the sperm of many suitors for up to two weeks in her ova ducts.
Sperm from the 'strongest' males then go on to fertilise her prized eggs. And the result may be up to eight healthy offspring sired from four strong males.
Dr Diana Fisher and colleagues from the Australian National University conducted two separate mating experiments.
In the first, they took female marsupials from the wild and when they were in season allowed them to mate either with a single male, or with three different males, every two days.
A year later they replicated the experiment, but kept lactating females in captivity until just before weaning.
This allowed the researchers to determine whether the previous benefit of polyandry depended on stressful conditions in their natural habitat, or could be replicated in the laboratory. 
They found the females in both populations weren't particularly fussy and, given the chance, mated happily with multiple partners.
The only males they avoided in the wild were those that were obviously picked on by other males; those perceived as 'weak'.
"By experimentally assigning mates to females, we were able to show that polyandry [females mating with more than one male during the mating season] greatly increases offspring survival," Fisher says.
"DNA profiling shows that males that gain high paternity under sperm competition sire offspring that are more viable."
While many females in the animal and plant world mate with multiple partners, researchers have been at a loss to explain why. After all, the practice can be costly in terms of egg production, disease and injury. 
Earlier studies suggested polyandry yielded genetic benefits and could increase offspring survival, but until now the reasons why were unclear and the same effects had yet to be proved for mammals in the wild.
The researchers conclude that the practice of polyandry leads to 'better quality' offspring, an important factor in light of the fact that the marsupial will usually breed only once in her lifetime.
