
The new research supports the idea that there's more to heredity than DNA
Genetic instructions can be carried from one generation to the next in RNA, a mouse experiment by French researchers suggests.
Dr Minoo Rassoulzadegan, of the University of Nice Sophia Antipolis, and team report their findings in today's issue of the journal Nature.
"This is the first demonstration of RNA-induced transmission of heredity," Rassoulzadegan says.
RNA, or ribonucleic acid, is a single-strand molecule that plays a key role in making proteins in animals by transferring and translating genetic information encoded in DNA.
But Rassoulzadegan and team have now found that it is capable of much more.
Spotty mutant mice surprise scientists
They engineered laboratory mice to have a variation in a gene called Kit. The variation gave the mice white spots on their tails. 
The mice concerned had a mutant version and a normal version in the two copies of their Kit gene.
The researchers crossed these heterozygous mice and examined the offspring.
Some of the offspring had both copies of the normal Kit genes, yet, remarkably, they also had the white spots. 
The researchers also found that the white spots were transmitted to the next generation of mice, even though these rodents also had the normal genes. 
A challenge to Mendel's laws
The findings challenge the laws of inheritance, set down in the 19th century by Austrian monk Gregor Mendel. According to these, offspring can only get the genetic code exactly as it is handed on from their parents. 
By all rights, if the mice both had normal Kit genes, their tails should have been reassuringly spotless. 
Rassoulzadegan suggests the answer to this mystery lies in RNA. 
The mutant version of Kit produces unexpectedly large numbers of aberrantly-sized "messenger" RNA, she found. 
In addition, the sperm of mutant mice also, surprisingly, was found to have accumulations of RNA. 
Intrigued by this, her team injected RNA from mutant cells into normal embryos and, presto, spotted-tail mice were born.
RNA carried in sperm acts as gene silencer
The hypothesis is that RNA is carried in the mouse's sperm, and at fertilisation it "silences" the activity of the normal Kit gene. This happens not only in the offspring but in subsequent generations too.
Back in 1956, an American biologist called R. Alexander Brink became the first to suggest "paramutation", in which an order issued by one set of genes was remembered in ensuing generations, even though the gene itself was not subsequently handed on in reproduction.
But the phenomenon has only been seen in lab plants, not in mammals. In addition, it occurs only very rarely, apparently as a result of interaction between the two copies of a gene. Normally, the pair of genes operate independently. 
Caution urged before rewriting rule book
In a commentary on Rassoulzadegan's research, also carried in  Nature, Dr Paul Soloway of Cornell University, New York, stresses caution, saying that her findings have to be replicated by others before Mendel's rule book has to be rewritten. 
And, he says, the mechanism by which the transmitted RNA works remains unclear. 
But if the work is validated, the way is open for a rethink on how RNA could influence the transmision of heredity diseases, metabolism and even types of "imprinted" behaviour from distant generations.
