
Could our perpetual childishness actually cause genetic changes?
Grown-ups today are more immature than ever, according to research showing that increasing numbers of adults are retaining behaviour and attitudes normally associated with youth.
As a consequence, many older people simply never achieve mental adulthood, says evolutionary psychiatrist Bruce Charlton from the School of Biology at the University of Newcastle upon Tyne, England.
Among scientists, the phenomenon is called psychological neoteny.
Charlton, who is also editor-in-chief of Medical Hypotheses, which will feature a paper outlining his theory in an upcoming issue.
Charlton says humans have an inherent attraction to physical youth, because it can be a sign of fertility, health and vitality.
A symptom of instability?
In the mid 20th century, however, another force kicked in, with an increasing trend for individuals to change jobs, learn new skills, move to new places and make new friends.
A "child-like flexibility of attitudes, behaviours and knowledge" is probably adaptive to the increased instability of the modern world, Charlton believes.
Formal education now extends well past physical maturity, leaving students with minds that are, he says, "unfinished".
"The psychological neoteny effect of formal education is an accidental by-product, the main role of education is to increase general, abstract intelligence and prepare for economic activity," he says.
"But formal education requires a child-like stance of receptivity to new learning, and cognitive flexibility."
"When formal education continues into the early twenties," he says, "it probably, to an extent, counteracts the attainment of psychological maturity, which would otherwise occur at about this age".
Genetic changes
Charlton says past cultures often marked the advent of adulthood with initiation ceremonies.
While the human mind responds to new information over the course of any individual's lifetime, Charlton argues that past physical environments were more stable and allowed for a state of psychological maturity.
In hunter-gatherer societies, that maturity was probably achieved during a person's late teens or early twenties, he says.
"By contrast, many modern adults fail to attain this maturity, and such failure is common and indeed characteristic of highly educated and, on the whole, effective and socially valuable people," he said.
"People such as academics, teachers, scientists and many other professionals are often strikingly immature outside of their strictly specialist competence in the sense of being unpredictable, unbalanced in priorities, and tending to overreact."
Charlton added that since modern cultures now favour cognitive flexibility, "immature" people tend to thrive and succeed, and have set the tone not only for contemporary life, but also for the future, when it is possible our genes may even change as a result of the psychological shift.
Cultural shallowness
The faults of youth are retained along with the virtues, he believes.
These include short attention span, sensation and novelty-seeking, short cycles of arbitrary fashion and a sense of cultural shallowness.
At least "youthfulness is no longer restricted to youth," he says due to overall improvements in food and healthcare, along with cosmetic technologies.
David Brooks, a social commentator and an op-ed columnist at The New York Times, has documented a somewhat related phenomenon concerning the current blurring of "the bourgeois world of capitalism and the bohemian counterculture," which Charlton believes is a version of psychological neoteny.
