
Venus' south pole, by day and night. The left hand image is the view by day, showing sunlight reflected from the tops of clouds. The right hand image, taken using infrared sensors, shows a dynamic spiral cloud, with the darker regions corresponding to thicker cloud cover
The newly arrived Venus Express spacecraft has relayed the first view of the planet's south pole, revealing a dark vortex and an odd cloud-type structure. 
"We're already experiencing the hot, dynamic environment of Venus," says project scientist Dr Hakan Svedhem. 
Venus Express captured its first images of its host planet the day on Wednesday, the day after it slipped into orbit following a five month journey.
The European-built craft is expected to spend two Venusian days - which is more than a year on Earth - studying the planet's dense and turbulent atmosphere.
The mission will attempt to learn why a planet so similar in size and composition to Earth ended up so vastly different. 
Venus has an extremely thick and toxic atmosphere that traps heat more effectively than any other planet in the solar system. 
Its surface temperature is hotter than Mercury, which orbits closer to the Sun, and its atmospheric pressure is similar to Earth's pressure about a kilometre beneath the ocean. 
Although the new images are relatively low-quality - when the probe reaches its final orbit scientists expect more than 100 times better resolution - researchers are intrigued by the clear structures and unexpected details seen in the planet's atmosphere. 
The Sun-lit images primarily show reflected light from Venus' cloud tops, down to a height of about 65 kilometres above the planet's surface. 
The night view, which was taken using infrared sensors, shows a dynamic spiral of clouds in the lower atmosphere, similar to a structure previously seen at the planet's north pole. 
The pictures were taken from a distance of about 200,000 kilometres. 
Zooming in on Venus
Venus Express is in the process of tightening its orbit, which will eventually reach as close as 250 kilometres above the planet's surface. 
Venus Express is the first spacecraft to visit Venus since NASA's Magellan radar mapping mission of the 1990s.
The probe is equipped with seven instruments, many of which are spares from Europe's ongoing Mars Express mission and the Rosetta comet probe. 
Researchers hope to unlock the history and mechanisms of Venus' dense and toxic atmosphere. 
They want to understand how the presence of carbon dioxide, water vapour and sulfuric gases trap heat in the planet's atmosphere, similar to how a glass greenhouse warms plants on Earth.
