
There will still be fish on the menu, governments say, despite warnings that stocks will be depleted within 50 years
Governments and the UN food agency have cast serious doubts on a major scientific study that predicts all marine fish and seafood species face will collapse by 2048.
The UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) says that the conservation effort must be improved.
But it says that it is "unlikely" there would be no seafood on consumers' plates by mid-century, calling the report "statistically dangerous". 
"Such a massive collapse ... would require reckless behaviour of all industries and governments for four decades, and an incredible level of apathy of all world citizens to let this happen, without mentioning economic forces that would discourage this from happening," says Serge Michel Garcia, director of the FAO's fishery resources division.
South Korea's fisheries ministry labelled the report "too radical", and says more scientific data is needed before heeding the call of environmentalists like Greenpeace to set aside 40% of oceans as marine reserves.
The cry for urgent action came in the wake of a report published in the current issue of the journal Science.
In the most exhaustive study conducted to date, US and Canadian researchers warned that overfishing and pollution threatened the accelerated loss of ocean species, ecosystems and human food supplies. 
The worldwide fishing industry currently extracts some 80 million tonnes of fish each year from the world's oceans, according to the FAO.
It represents a significant economic sector in many countries, including Scandinavia nations, where officials expressed scepticism about the report's conclusions.
"I don't think the oceans will be empty in 50 years time," says Helga Pedersen, the Norwegian minister of fisheries.
"That said, we have to work harder to secure sustainable management of fish stocks," she adds. 
Nordic fishing unions say industrial overfishing is not, in any case, the main culprit.
"Sure there are threatened species, but pollution is the main problem," says Lena Talvitie, vice-president of the Finnish federation of professional fishermen.
For environmentalists, however, the report's message was unequivocal. 
"Overfishing and pirate fishing are destroying our oceans at an alarming rate," says Greenpeace spokesman Nilesh Goundar in Australia. 
Some 29% of 8000 fished species were considered "collapsed" in 2003, that is, their catches had declined by 90% or more," says Assistant Professor Boris Worm of  Dalhousie University in Canada, lead author of the report.
The European Commission reacted by urging better international cooperation to turn around any doomsday scenario on the world's marine fish supply.
