
The Milky Way is about one and a half times more massive than Andromeda, pictured here
The Milky Way may be the most massive galaxy in the local group and not Andromeda, according to research that overturns decades of thinking.
University of Cambridge astronomer Dr Mark Wilkinson and colleagues looked at several small dwarf galaxies in the local group, which includes Andromeda, the Milky Way and dozens of smaller galaxies.
When they estimated Andromeda's mass, they found it less than previously thought, making the Milky Way the heftiest.
Astronomers determine the mass of galaxies by looking at how fast the stars and the gas in the inner disk are rotating. The faster they move, the more massive the galaxy.
Until now precise measurements of the rotation of the galaxy's dark halo, which extends for thousands of light-years beyond the galaxy's visible starry disk, have not been possible because there are few visible objects that can be measured. 
But with the high resolution of the European Southern Observatory's Very Large Telescope, Wilkinson measured the velocities of stars in several extremely faint dwarf galaxies orbiting Andromeda to determine the mass of its dark halo.
"Although Andromeda's inner disk is moving faster than the Milky Way's, further out in the halo, which is almost exclusively made up of dark matter, the opposite is true," he says.
"The best fit for the data showed that the Milky Way is about one and a half times more massive than Andromeda." 
Wilkinson and colleagues posted their findings recently on the arXiv physics website and have submitted the data to the journal Nuclear Physics B.
Largest but not heaviest
Last year astronomers suggested that Andromeda might be three times larger than previously thought. But the results are not necessarily contradictory.
Data from the WM Keck Observatory in Hawaii was used to indicate the extent of the visible disk rather than the mass of the whole galaxy. 
"We need more data to work out the point at which the mass starts falling off," says Wilkinson.
"That could tell us more about the profile of dark matter. However this [latest research] is a very small sample, only two out of billions of galaxies, so we need to reduce the error bars."  
Australian researcher Dr Jeremy Bailin, from Swinburne University of Technology, agrees.
"It's notoriously difficult to measure the mass of astronomical objects. You can't put a galaxy on a scale," he says.
"But reducing the uncertainties on mass is important for understanding the history of the local group and will help us better understand how it compares with other groups of galaxies."
