
Stargazers hope to learn more about Pluto and its moons during the occultation
Earth and Pluto will move exactly in line with a star in a rare astronomical event known as an occultation.
Occultations occur when one celestial body moves in front of another, hiding it from view.
The event, during which a faint star catalogued as UCAC 2603 9859 will be occulted by Pluto, will occur at 02:25 AEST on 13 June (16:25 12 June UTC) and will last less than two minutes.
Teams of astronomers have travelled from around the world to view the occultation.
The main visibility areas will be in New Zealand and southern Australia.
Amateur astronomers with large telescopes will also be attempting to view the occultation, good weather conditions permitting. 
The shadow cast by Pluto, the smallest and most distant planet in the solar system, as it tracks across the Earth is only 2,300 kilometres wide - the same as its diameter.
Learning more about Pluto
The occultation will help explain some of the mysteries of Pluto's nitrogen atmosphere and whether it has a system of rings similar to Saturn, astronomers say.
It also offers one of only a few opportunities to obtain data to fine-tune experiments on NASA's New Horizons space mission due to reach Pluto in 2015.
Dr Mark Buie, from Lowell Observatory in the US and a leading authority on occultations, says the occultation could provide new insights into conditions on Pluto.
"If the planet had no atmosphere, when it moved in front of the star the star would disappear instantly," he says.
"But an atmosphere refracts the light a little - it gets spread out, so we see the star get gradually fainter as it goes behind Pluto.
"The signature of that light curve, how it diminishes with time, allows us to measure fundamental properties of the atmosphere - what it's made of, its temperature and how extensive it is."
New Zealand observations of a Pluto occultation in 1988 first confirmed that Pluto had an atmosphere and new data will give scientists an idea about what happens to Pluto's atmosphere as it gets further from the sun. 
"We've only seen Pluto through a quarter of one orbit," says Buie, "and some models predict that the atmosphere will freeze right out. We'd like to test that." 
The event is even more significant because of the recent discovery of two new satellites to add to Pluto's moon Charon. 
"That would be fantastically exciting because it would give us a shot at constraining their size," Buie says.
Detailed information about the occultation can be found here.
