
The future is nuclear, says a new report into Australia's rich uranium resources
New nuclear technology will cut waste so significantly that we may no longer need to dump it underground, according to an Australian government report.
The report, tabled in parliament this week, also says Australia should lift restrictions on uranium exploration, mining and export because at present nuclear power is the only "reliable and proven" way of cutting greenhouse gas emissions.
"Advanced nuclear reactors and spent fuel reprocessing technologies are now being developed which will significantly reduce the quantity and toxicity of nuclear waste," says the report, Australia's uranium - greenhouse friendly fuel for an energy hungry world.
"These technological advances could potentially obviate the need for geological repositories altogether."
The new generation of reactors could also reduce the isolation period needed for waste to "just a few hundred years".
But Dr Mark Diesendorf of the Institute of Environmental Studies at the University of New South Wales, has dismissed these comments as "propaganda for the nuclear industry".
He says the 440 nuclear reactors operating around the world today are "almost identical" to those of 25 years ago.
"This is speculation about future reactors that are not on the market," he says of comments made in the report.
Reducing waste
Nuclear waste consists of spent uranium, plutonium and other by-products, which critics like Diesendorf say needs to be managed for up to hundreds of thousands of years.
Professor Stephen Lincoln, an expert in nuclear energy and uranium from the University of Adelaide, says it's possible to recycle some of this waste by turning it into a mixed uranium-plutonium oxide, or MOX.
"So instead of just using uranium oxide in the fuel rods you use mixed uranium and plutonium. That burns up the plutonium but it also produces nuclear power," he says.
Professor Leslie Kemeny, Australian foundation member of the International Nuclear Energy Academy and a consultant nuclear physicist, says three reactors around the world are already using this so-called MOX.
Kemeny says we'll also get better at developing ways of using waste from nuclear reactors, not only as an energy source but for use in industry and hospitals.
"I firmly believe ... everything that is taken out of the reactor core to be put into a waste depository is highly valuable," he says.
Improving safety
Kemeny says new technology will not only cut back waste, but will make nuclear reactors safer.
He says pebble-bed reactors are being developed that package the uranium in graphite balls rather than iron rods, making waste easier to handle.
"With the generation IV reactors you will go for a fuel element that is enriched particles of uranium interspersed with silicon and carbon in a small ball or hexagonal shaped fuel element," he says.
"You can circulate these balls in and out of the reactor or just drop in a set of orange-sized or tennis ball-sized and take out ones that have been there a long time."
And because pebble-bed reactors are cooled by gas like helium or carbon dioxide they reduce the risk of overheating and a Chernobyl-style meltdown, he says.
But Deisendorf says according to his calculations pebble-bed reactors would produce 13 times more nuclear waste than conventional ones.
"You don't have rods but you have 13 times the quantity of nuclear waste because you're embedding the fuel in pebbles, and the pebbles occupy a lot of volume and it all becomes highly radioactive," he says.
Lincoln says while pebble bed rectors are "fine in principle", none are currently being used to generate power and the fuel is more expensive to produce.
"When you bring in any new technology it's got to be proved and tested and the final analysis is, is it commercially competitive in terms of producing electricity by comparison with the currently used reactors?" he says.
Lincoln says no degree of technological sophistication will ensure 100% safety at nuclear reactors and adds it's difficult to imagine a reactor so advanced that it produces no waste at all. 
"It's true that modern reactors are better in that respect, they produce less waste. But they're always going to produce it," he says.
"It's still quite a significant issue because at this point in time there is not one single permanent storage for high-level nuclear waste."
