
She might be laughing but her brain is really picking out mismatches
Laughter involves a unique form of consciousness, says an Australian researcher who is trying to unravel the thought patterns that underpin humour.
Ann Hale, a medical anthropologist from the University of Sydney, spoke about the social and cultural context of laughter at a recent conference of the Australian Anthropological Society in Cairns.
She believes jokes rely on the juxtapositioning of two mismatched or incompatible concepts.
For example, she tells the joke about the prisoner who plays cards with his wardens. But the prisoner cheats, so they kick him out of prison.
"Prisons have rules that they lock you up," Hale says. "But if you cheat you get kicked out. So you have two concepts there."
The same applies to slapstick humour, she says.
When we laugh at someone falling over, it's not the process of falling that tickles our funny bone but the attempt to stay upright.
"What makes people laugh at slapstick is not falling off the tightrope, but what you do to stay on," she says.
"We've got an idea that this is what you look like when you're upright and here's somebody trying to stay upright.
"It's within the same concept but it's incongruous, it's the mismatch ... it's not the fact that you've fallen onto your backside."
Even babies do it
Research has shown we instinctively recognise these "incompatible contexts" in the first year of life, Hale says.
"Research shows that if a mother crawls towards the edge of the cot the baby will laugh because it interferes with the convention that babies crawl, mothers walk," she says.
It also suggests that we respond to contextual mismatches without having to "get" the joke.
Hale says these thought processes have been compared to the reactions of highly trained sportspeople, like the tennis player who is in position to return a serve "before the brain kicks in".
Laughter is essential because it provides a cognitive respite, Hales says.
"Laughter offers a temporary respite from the everyday clutter of thought. It's a different sort of consciousness with is uncluttered by the everyday 'shoulds' and 'buts'," she says.
Hale believes laughter is a uniquely human talent that operates within a cultural context but also transcends culture.
"It's a kind of perception, a recognition," she says.
"Understanding laughter and humour might get us closer to looking at what consciousness is and [providing] another paradigm."
