
'Serious games' are being developed to teach the US military how to defuse tense situations in Iraq
Gamers are increasingly dropping virtual swords and guns, and picking up serious subjects such as cancer or the Iraq war, injecting a dose of reality into the multi-billion dollar sector.
A two-day Serious Games Summit near Washington saw some 500 game designers, publishers, academic experts as well as representatives from the defence and health sectors share information about new 'serious games' on the market that deal with real-world issues. 
"Serious games are games used for some other serious pursuit than entertainment," says Ben Sawyer, co-director of the Serious Games Initiative, which held its first summit two years ago.
Among games featured at the summit were The Redistricting Game, which teaches administrators how legislative redistricting works; HumanSim, which tests medical diagnostic skills; and Tactical Iraqi, a program to train US soldiers with linguistic and cultural skills needed for missions in Iraq. 
That game, largely funded by the US Department of Defense, encourages soldiers who face various scenarios with virtual Iraqis to use diplomacy to avoid or defuse tense situations. Players are also familiarised with basic Iraqi culture.
In one episode, for example, two soldiers seeking information from local Iraqis sitting in a cafe are shown how to introduce themselves to make clear they are not a threat and are told to take off their sunglasses as eye contact is important in Iraqi culture. 
"Clearly, in hindsight, a lot of this training should have been done earlier, but the military recognises it now, and is serious about it now, and I see this as being a permanent change in the military," say Lewis Johnson, chief executive officer of Tactical Language and Culture, a California-based company that developed the game.
"At this point the US military is really taking the lead in emphasising the importance of understanding other cultures, other languages, the importance of communication," he adds.
Johnson says a number of countries have expressed interest in his company's products, which include Tactical Pashto and Tactical French for soldiers or civilian contractors working in Afghanistan or in French-speaking African countries. 
He says the company is also seeking to develop games for the general public and to be used in schools.
Johnson, Sawyer and others attending the summit say they believe the serious games sector will gain popularity in coming years as more funding becomes available and as the Super Mario generation comes of age. 
"Serious games has got very far to go, but in a good way that is nowhere but up," Sawyer says.
"As we start to unlock where we can use games and where they can be successful, and as commercial gaming hurdles forward and we can gain by trailblazing technology they churn out, the things we will be able to do two to three years from now will be more amazing." 
Sawyer says he expects the next big success story to be a serious game being developed to enable students to design their own game on a certain topic.
"Instead of writing a term paper, you might design a game about running a state park, owning a hotel or running an office," he says.
