
The newly discovered dinosaur looked like T-rex, pictured here, but had a longer, narrower skull and shorter, blade-like teeth
Remains of an enormous species of carnivorous dinosaur, longer than all other previously identified meat-eating dinos, have been found in Argentina, scientists say.
Researchers announced that the newly discovered meat muncher Mapusaurus roseae belongs to a group of gigantic carnivorous dinosaurs called carcharodontosaurids.
This group includes Giganotosaurus, the largest meat-eating dinosaur to ever walk the Earth. 
The discovery of the new dinosaur in western Patagoniais is published in the latest issue of the journal Geodiversitas. 
Palaeontologists say Mapusaurus was more than 12 metres long and had a shinbone that was longer than that of Giganotosaurus.
But the current record-holder retains its "largest" title because Giganotosaurus would have been wider and heavier than Mapusaurus. 
Nevertheless, the new dinosaur would have been an intimidating creature, especially when it was part of a group.
Hundreds of bones
Researchers found hundreds of Mapusaurus bones dating to 100 million years together in a pack that would have included 5 metre long juveniles and adults which were more than 12 metres long. 
"This is arguably the nastiest thing ever found, as it is the first pack found for giant meat-eating dinosaurs," says 'Dino' Don Lessem, who participated in the dig and helped to fund it.
Lessem, a dinosaur expert who was a consultant on the film Jurassic Park, says that Mapusaurus would have lived at the same time as the largest animal that ever lived, Argentinosaurus, which was a 38 metre long plant-eating dinosaur. 
"In a pack, [Mapusaurus] could take down this herbivore despite its weight - 10 times [more than] even this largest of meat eaters," he says. 
Like T-rex
Philip Currie, who also worked on the excavation and is a professor of biological sciences at the University of Alberta, says the new dinosaur somewhat resembled Tyrannosaurus rex. 
"Mapusaurus looked something like T. rex but had a longer, narrower skull," Currie explains.
"Its teeth were shorter and more blade-like. The teeth and long skull were better adapted to biting big chunks of meat out of sauropod dinosaurs. T. rex, on the other hand, had longer, thicker teeth for biting through the bones of its prey." 
The palaeontologists therefore think the newly discovered carnivore both scavenged and hunted for meat. 
Hunting in packs
Dr Rodolfo Coria, who also worked on the excavation and is a palaeontologist at the Carmen Funes Museum in Argentina, says that Mapusaurus may have been unique among carnivores in that it seemed to live a more social life as it was found in a pack.
T. rex and virtually all other carnivorous dinosaurs usually are solitary specimens, suggesting they mostly lived and hunted alone. 
Coria says it is possible the big meat eaters evolved different habits for each species, and Mapusaurus simply may have been more social. The pack even appears to have passed away together in a mass die-off. 
Dr Michael Ryan, curator and head of vertebrate palaeontology at the Cleveland Museum of Natural History, examined the dinosaur bones on a recent trip to Patagonia. He agrees with the other palaeontologists. 
"This new discovery helps us better understand the diversity of giant carnivorous dinosaurs," says Ryan.
"Even more interesting is the fact that the find contains the remains of multiple individuals of different sizes and ages."
