
There may be remnants of Neanderthal genes in the nuclear DNA of people with European ancestors
People of European descent may be 5% Neanderthal, according to a DNA study that questions whether modern humans left Africa and replaced all other existing hominids.
The same study, published in the latest issue of the journal PloS Genetics, also says West Africans could be related to an archaic human population.
As both groups spread, the findings suggest we all have a bit of archaic DNA in our genes.
"Instead of a population that left Africa 100,000 years ago and replaced all other archaic human groups, we propose that this population interacted with another population that had been in Europe for much longer, maybe 400,000 years," says Vincent Plagnol.
Plagnol, a researcher in the Department of Molecular and Computational Biology at the University of Southern California, and colleague Assistant Professor Jeffrey Wall analysed patterns of ancestral linkage in 135 modern individuals.
They looked at people from Utah with ancestors from Northern and Western Europe and Yoruba people from West Africa.
Using statistics and computer modelling, the researchers focused on linkage 'disequilibriums', or sections within genes that did not make sense if only modern human matings are considered.
The missing genetic links only fit if some other hominid population is introduced into the model, the scientists say.
"We considered the data from modern human DNA and fitted a model to explain what we see," explains Plagnol.
"We found that a simple model cannot explain the data if we do not add an 'ancestral population'. If this population did not cross with modern humans, or almost did not, the effect is too small to explain the data. We find that a rate of 5% is what is needed to explain what we see."
The researchers agree with recent studies that conclude Neanderthals did not contribute any mitochondrial DNA, or mtDNA, genetic material that is passed from mothers to children. 
But they say other portions of the European genome, such as those associated with nuclear DNA, may still harbour the Neanderthal imprint.
Plagnol says different parts of the genome have different ancestry, so an individual could have a fraction of a certain chromosome that is inherited from a Neanderthal, but then possess "very typical Homo sapiens mtDNA".
The scientists are not certain which early human group could have contributed to West African DNA, but both Europeans and Africans in the study showed about the same 5% archaic contribution.
Neanderthals are believed to have originated in Africa around 400,000 years ago, but they left and then settled in Europe, hence the apparent lack of interaction with modern humans in Africa.
Alan Templeton, professor of Evolutionary and Population Programs at the University of Michigan, has also conducted DNA studies and comes to similar conclusions.
"The humans who were in Africa and the humans who were in Eurasia were regularly interchanging genes," he says.
"There was interbreeding and when humans came out of Africa 100,000 years ago they did not replace these other human populations in Eurasia."
New technologies are being developed to sequence nuclear DNA from fossils, so in the near future, scientists may learn more about how modern human genes compare with those of archaic humans, like Neanderthals.
