
Scientists found this cyanobacteria in sandy and muddy marine sediments near Broome, Western Australia
The oceans are teeming with 10 to 100 more types of bacteria than previously believed, many of them unknown to science, according to a new study.
Using a new genetic mapping technique, US, Dutch and Spanish scientists say they found more than 20,000 different types of microbe in a single litre of water from deep sites in the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans. 
"These observations blow away all previous estimates of bacterial diversity in the ocean," says lead author Dr Mitchell Sogin of the Marine Biological Laboratory at Woods Hole, Massachusetts.
He says past studies have suggested that one litre of water would contain 1000 to 3000 types of microbe, the oldest form of life on the planet.
Microbes make up more than 90% of the total mass of life in the seas, from bacteria to whales.
"We've found 10 or maybe 100 times more diversity in sea water than anyone imagined was present," he says.
The study is part of a global Census of Marine Life and is published today in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
Sogin says the findings suggest there might be more than 10 million types of bacteria in the seas alone.
"If you're interested in new frontiers, things to discover, all you have to do is go to the ocean," Sogin says. 
Until recent years, estimates of the total number of species on Earth were below a million.
The new findings suggest that a swimmer swallowing a mouthful of sea water may be consuming perhaps 1000 types of bacteria.  
The report says that many of the types of bacteria found at the sample sites,  including a hydrothermal vent at a subsea volcano off Oregon, are present in very low numbers, in what the researchers call a "rare biosphere".
"Not only are they diverse from each other but they are very diverse from anything we have in the molecular database," Sogin says.
The variety could upset normal understanding of the make-up of life in the oceans, and how it evolved. 
One possibility is that some types of microbe are rare in some parts of the oceans but common in others, challenging traditional views of the seas as a homogenous bacterial soup.
"There might be a 'biogeography' of microorganisms in the sea, something that microbiologists have been debating for perhaps hundreds of years," Sogin says. 
Another possibility is that rare bacteria are tolerated in a habitat because they produce something, perhaps an enzyme or vitamin, that more common species need.
A side-effect of tolerating scarce types of bacteria is that they might prove to be a reserve of spare parts to help ocean life rebound after some cataclysm such as a giant asteroid or an ice age, Sogin says. 
Some rare species, for instance, might have genes allowing them to thrive if large tracts of the oceans freeze.
Bacteria can exchange genetic material relatively easily, speeding adaptation and recovery of the total ocean population. 
Sogin says the variety of life might also benefit pharmaceutical and biotechnology firms.
"If you have a business plan based on drugs from diverse microbes the study should be very encouraging," he says.
