
Exposure to cosmic radiation and microgravity is expected to generate super-seeds and super-plants
China plans to blast seeds into space in a novel way of boosting the nation's food production, reports say.
Scientists hope that exposure to cosmic radiation and microgravity will cause genetic mutations in the seeds that will improve crop yield back on Earth.
Some 2000 seeds will go into orbit as part of a two-week mission aboard a recoverable satellite, Shijian-8, the China Daily newspaper reports.
This is set to be launched by a Long March 2C rocket in early September.
The 'seed satellite' will enable scientists to try to cultivate high-yield and high-quality plants, Sun Laiyan, head of the China National Space Administration, told the paper.
"Exposed to special environments such as cosmic radiation and microgravity, some seeds will mutate to such an extent that they may produce much higher yields and improved quality," the paper says.
Nine categories of seeds, including grains, cash crops and forage plants will be aboard the satellite, it says. 
China has been experimenting with space-bred seeds for years, with rice and wheat exposed to the universe resulting in increased yields, the paper says. 
Space-bred tomato and green pepper seeds have resulted in harvests 10-20% larger than ordinary seeds, while vegetables grown from space-bred seeds have a higher vitamin content, it adds. 
However the satellite to be launched in September will be the first dedicated specifically for seeds. 
China's space seed experiments come as the nation seeks ways to feed its 1.3 billion people amid a rapid decline in farming land due to swift industrialisation. 
The nation has pursued some forms of genetically modified crops, with GMO tomatoes, soy beans and corn already in production.
China is also mulling plans to approve the production of genetically modified rice. 
'Scotty' revisits final frontier
In other space news, the remains of actor James Doohan, who played Scotty on Star Trek, will be blasted into space in October, the company organising the flight says.
The actor who inspired the catchphrase "Beam me up, Scotty", even though it was never actually uttered on the show, died a year ago at the age of 85. 
Houston-based company Space Services originally planned to blast Doohan's remains into space last year but the flight was delayed to allow more tests on the rocket. 
The company previously blasted the remains of Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry into space in 1997.
