
The Larsen ice shelf, seen here collapsing in 2002, may be under greater threat from faster westerly winds over Antarctica
Heat-bearing westerly winds have picked up speed in the past 50 years are likely to be contributing to the melting of Antarctica's Larsen ice shelf, say scientists.
Meteorologist Professor John Turner of the British Antarctic Survey says the biggest change in the wind speed occurs in the southern hemisphere summer.
"The ice there [on the ice shelf] is melted most in summer and that is the season when the winds are increased," says Turner, who gave a keynote talk at the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research meeting in Hobart this week.
Antarctica generally has lower temperatures and pressures than areas at more northern latitudes, like Australia. 
This differential generates storms that take warm air south and cold air north.
Turner says that over the past 50 years the differential appears to have increased, and this has increased the speed of westerly winds over the Southern Ocean by an average of a few knots.
The increase in speed means the westerlies are now blowing over the Antarctic Peninsula rather than around it, bringing destructive warm air onto the Larsen ice shelf to the east of the peninsula, says Turner.
He says the pick-up in the westerlies will also influence climate elsewhere on the planet by driving the Antarctic Circumpolar Current faster. The current shifts vast amounts of water and plays a major role in global heat transfer.
Beyond natural variability
While the pressure and temperature differential between Antarctica and more northern latitudes goes up and down in natural cycles, Turner says climate models suggest recent changes are "exceptional" when compared to the past 1000 years.
"What we've seen over the last 50 years is larger than anything in these models," he says. "That suggests that man is playing a part in this."
Turner says an increase in the speed of westerlies ties in with the prediction of more extreme storms in a warming world.
And he says models also support the idea that increasing greenhouse gases are causing the westerlies to increase, although exactly how they are doing so is not known.
Research on the increasing speed of westerlies and their role in melting the Larsen ice shelf is due to be published soon in the Journal of Climate.
Double whammy
Turner says the ice shelves are very sensitive to climate change because they have ocean beneath them and air above.
The warm westerlies blowing over their top and the warming oceans flowing beneath are "like a double whammy" for the ice shelves, he says.
Melting ice shelves in themselves don't affect sea level because they are already floating, but it's their role in holding back ice flowing from the main part of the peninsula that is in jeopardy.
"If you take away these ice shelves, the danger is the ice from the interior could start flowing faster," says Turner.
He says preliminary research suggests ice is already flowing off the peninsula faster than in the past.
Antarctica holds 90% of the world's fresh water in the form of ice, says Turner, and if all of this melted there would be a 65-metre rise in sea level. 
The current sea level is rising at 3 millimetres per year.
