
Some women with normal pregnancies have caesareans as a matter of choice
While it is rare for women in developed countries to die from childbirth, a new French study has found caesarean delivery more than triples the risk.
The findings are from a study led by Dr Catherine Deneux-Tharaux of the Maternite Hopital Tenon in Paris, published in the September issue of Obstetrics & Gynecology. 
"This study shows that caesarean delivery is associated with a three-fold increase in the risk of postpartum maternal death as compared with vaginal delivery," the researchers say.
There has been a continuous rise in the rate of caesareans in developed countries.
And some professionals have recently proposed elective caesarean delivery should be an acceptable first-choice method of delivery for women with normal pregnancy, say Deneux-Tharaux and colleagues.
But, they say, the increased risk of maternal death needs to be taken into account by clinicians and women when balancing risks and benefits of vaginal versus caesarean delivery.
Deneux-Tharaux and team looked at 65 maternal deaths that occurred between 1996 and 2000, and that were reported to a French confidential enquiry on maternal deaths. 
They compared these to a control group of 10,244 women selected from the French National Perinatal Survey.
All of the deaths followed births of a single child and were not due to conditions existing prior to delivery. The women had also not been hospitalised during pregnancy. 
The researchers found that the risk of death - from blood clots, infection or complications from anaesthesia - was 3.6 times higher for women who had caesareans.
The risk of death after childbirth was increased whether or not the caesarean was performed before the onset of labour or during labour.
The researchers say previous studies of the relationship between caesarean delivery and risk of maternal death have reported inconsistent results.
"Our objectives in this study were to provide a valid estimate of the risk," they say.
Although rates of maternal death in most developed countries are relatively low, in the US women have a 1 in 3500 chance of pregnancy-related death.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists say the incidence of maternal mortality has not significantly decreased in the last two decades.
But Deneux-Tharaux and team say there is persistent underidentification of maternal mortality in developed countries.
A recent study found a 19% underreporting of maternal deaths in vital statistics from France, they say.
