
The turtles are an important source of protein for Aboriginal people and children are taught to hunt them from an early age
Feral pigs are threatening the northern snake-necked turtle population in Arnhem Land to the point where the species could become extinct in some areas, Australian researchers predict.
In a single experiment, feral pigs killed 96% of radio-tracked turtles in a monitored area within a three-month period.
"They dig them up like truffles," says PhD candidate Damien Fordham, of the University of Canberra, whose research will be published in the journal Biological Conservation.
Fordham says while the turtles are found across northern Australia, the consequences of extinction for the local Indigenous population would be "extreme".
Northern snake-necked turtles have traditionally provided an important seasonal source of protein for Indigenous communities in Arnhem Land.
Not only would Indigenous communities lose a valuable source of bush tucker, but with it the strong cultural ties they have with the turtle.
Fordham and colleagues mounted tiny radio tracking devices to the shells of 40 snake-necked turtles around waterholes in Indigenous land around Maningrida, 450 kilometres east of Darwin.
Turtles aestivate, or dig themselves into the mud, to escape heat and lack of water during the late dry season, anywhere between August to December.
Of the 28 recorded turtle deaths during the 12-week period, 27 were attributed to feral pigs.
Researchers believe feral pigs could have stumbled upon, and then eaten, some of the turtles while they were rooting around billabongs in search of morsels such as water chestnut.
But it was clear that in 11 of 27 turtle deaths the pigs had specifically located and dug them up.
Generally, pigs make a huge mess at they root around looking for food, but researchers noted relatively undisturbed areas around the 11 turtle deaths, indicating a direct 'hit'.
"This is disturbing as it indicates that pigs actively seek out and prey on aestivating turtles," Fordham says.
The researchers predict more turtles will die as the feral pig population increases.
Mathematical modelling of how many turtles survive in the year of the study, if carried across all years, could led to distinction of the turtles in the region, the researchers note.
Researchers say the turtle's best hope for survival is a few years of good rainfall, when pig predation rates are low.
Fordham would also like to see government funding to 'fence in' turtle-rich areas.
