
A shuttle mission in 2008 will be the Hubble Space Telescope's final service call
The US space agency says it will launch a final space shuttle mission to keep the ageing Hubble Space Telescope in orbit and operational. 
The decision, announced this week by NASA chief Dr Michael Griffin, follows a review of safety concerns and appeals from the scientific community to extend Hubble's life. 
Without a repair mission, which will probably be carried out in 2008, the telescope would shut down in 2009 or even earlier. 
Since it was launched into orbit 16 years ago, the telescope has helped astrophysicists peer deep into the universe, free of the distortions from the Earth's atmosphere.
Orbiting 575 kilometres above the Earth, the Hubble has enabled scientists to better measure the age and origins of the universe, observe distant supernovas, and identify and study bodies in and outside the solar system. 
In 2004, it conveyed pictures of the most distant parts of the universe ever observed by visible light, "the deepest portrait of the visible universe ever achieved by humankind", says the Space Telescope Science Institute. 
NASA had scheduled a mission for Hubble in 2003, but scrapped it after the Columbia shuttle disintegrated while returning to Earth. 
The accident raised serious safety questions for NASA, particularly with the shuttle's heat shield.
This week's announcement comes after two of the last three shuttle missions were judged a success.
Safety review
Griffin says the decision to go ahead was taken after a painstaking review of safety issues.
"We're not going to risk a crew in order to do a Hubble mission," he told staff at the Goddard Space Center.
NASA has said previously it was ready to refurbish the telescope as long as the mission did not put the space shuttle crew in jeopardy. 
The Hubble mission presents a challenge because the shuttle crew would not be able to seek refuge aboard the orbiting International Space Station if a serious problem arose.
NASA also is faced with a busy schedule of another 15 missions to finish building the space station before retiring the entire shuttle program in 2010, or four missions a year. 
A Hubble mission would probably be set for early 2008 and would require a second shuttle to be ready for any rescue mission should the crew face an emergency. 
A new mission to the Hubble would replace the telescope's six stabilising gyroscopes and its batteries to extend its life. 
Astronauts would also repair an infrared spectrometer that has been broken since 2004.
They would also install two new instruments, including the Wide Field Camera 3 that would enhance images of dark matter and of the first galaxies that were formed after the Big Bang.
