
Is the culture that produced this wood carving predisposed to violence? A new genetic study says 'yes'. But how much do social issues explain the crime statistics?
A New Zealand scientist says the country's indigenous Maori people have a 'warrior' gene which makes them more prone to violent and criminal behaviour.
Dr Rod Lea revealed his theory this week at the 11th International Congress of Human Genetics in Brisbane, Australia, acknowledging that it is controversial to suggest an ethnic group is predisposed towards criminal behaviour. 
Maori leaders immediately panned his claims.
Maori Party co-leader Tariana Turia told The Press newspaper that while she had heard of Maori having a genetic predisposition towards alcoholism, it was a big leap to include violent tendencies. 
"I realise that violence is an issue to us, but there are very common factors as well with violence which are not really related to race." 
Lea, a genetic epidemiologist at the Institute of Environmental Science and Research in Wellington, says that Maori men have an over-representation of monoamine oxidase, dubbed the warrior gene, which is associated with aggressive behaviour. 
The gene was discovered by US researchers but has never been linked to an ethnic group.
He told New Zealand's National Radio that the gene appeared to feature in about 60% of Maori men compared with 30% men of European descent. 
"I believe this gene has an influence on behaviour of humans in general, but I also believe that the influence is rather small," he says. 
"We have to be clear that behavioural traits such as susceptibility to addiction, aggressive behaviour, risk taking, all those sort of things are extremely complex and they are due to numerous factors including non-genetic environmental factors like upbringing and other lifestyle factors." 
Lea says the gene explains some of the issues involving Maori.
"They are going to be more aggressive and violent and more likely to get involved in risk-taking behaviour like gambling," he says, although he believes other, non-genetic factors might also be at play.
"There are lots of lifestyle, upbringing-related exposures that could be relevant here so, obviously, the gene won't automatically make you a criminal."  
Maori MP Hone Harawira believes social issues, including high unemployment, poor educational achievement and in many cases severe poverty, to be the main contributors to Maori violence rather than a warrior gene. 
"If you put any group in that situation ... I dare you to point at the group that wouldn't be aggressive as a result of being treated that way." 
National Urban Maori Authority chief executive John Tamihere says he is open to research-based evidence on whether there is a genetic reason for the over-representation of Maori in violence statistics.
