
Websites are changing the way musicians promote music and network with other artists
Musicians tend to hang out with artists who play in a different style rather than those from the same genre, an international study of online social networks has found.
The study tells us how musical genres evolve and the part that online networking plays in how people produce, promote and listen to music.
Researchers reporting on the arXiv physics website created two datasets based on information from the music website allmusic.com.
The first group, which they call the collaboration network, consists of artists who have worked together, such as Mick Jagger and Keith Richards.
The second group, or similarity network, includes artists who share an element of musical similarity, and puts Mick Jagger in with Tina Turner and David Bowie.
An analysis of the groups shows little correspondence between artists who play together and artists who make the same sort of music, suggesting that musicians are more likely to collaborate with others from different musical genres.
"Collaboration is not the mechanism for similarity spreading [and] playing similar music is not an ingredient to predict collaboration links," the authors, from the University of Michigan, the Universitat Pompeu Fabra and the Universidad Rey Juan Carlos in Spain conclude.
Collaboration networks
Jean Burgess is an Australian PhD student at the Queensland University of Technology (QUT) who has researched online and offline musician communities.
She says the study's collaboration network reveals something about the nature of how musical genres evolve.
"There's no necessary relationship between the style of music you play and who you play music with," Burgess says.
"Music has always been a really social practice and musicians will tend to work together on more of a social basis.
"This is how new genres have formed and re-formed throughout history, on the basis of people from different musical styles playing together."
Burgess says online networking has had a big impact on musicians and how their work is produced, promoted and consumed.
For example, websites like MySpace and YouTube allow artists to promote their work and network at the same time.
"The way other MySpace users consume that content feeds back into the formation of social networks," she says.
Folksonomies
The second network identified in the study, which is based on musical similarities, reflects another internet-driven development, used commercially by websites like Amazon, says Dr Axel Bruns, also of QUT.
The authors of the study say this can make it easier for consumers to discover new music.
But Bruns says it can also potentially result in less choice for consumers.
"You might end up with a situation where everyone who's a female singer songwriter might get compared to Joni Mitchell [rather than] a lesser known artist who may be a closer comparison," he says.
Bruns says categorising music by similarity, rather than genre, ties into the new phenomenon of folksonomies.
"Rather than having a pre-defined ranking which says these singers are rock or alternative or classical ... the categories derive from a broad user base interacting with the data," he says.
"It's a democratic form of taxonomy which is more in tune with public perception."
