
Researchers say that rock formations in the Pilbara represent a diverse fossil ecosystem, but not everyone agrees
Researchers say they have found "compelling" new evidence of the earliest known forms of life on Earth in ancient rock in Australia.
Australian and Canadian scientists say they have found new varieties of stromatolites, rock formations left 3.43 billion years ago in the Pilbara region of Western Australia.
If the researchers are right, and the stromatolites represent the fossilised remains of early microbes, this could cause scientists to revise estimates of when life began on Earth; some estimates are as recent as 1.9 billion years ago. 
The paper, published today in the journal Nature, also fuels an ongoing controversy about whether the formations were made by living things or chemical processes.
Lead author, PhD student Abigail Allwood from Sydney's Macquarie University, says the scientists found a stromatolite reef formed by microbial organisms.
The reef, along a 10 kilometre part of the Pilbara known as Strelley Pool Chert (STC), contains new types of stromatolites, some looking like upside down icecream cones, others like egg cartons. 
"The astonishing thing is [the reef's] age, which is a time in Earth's history when the very existence of life is uncertain," she says.
"We're seeing evidence not just of life's existence but that it was probably well established and already biodiverse, which suggests it could have emerged much earlier in Earth's history."
But detractors say they're not convinced.
Martin Brasier, professor of palaeobiology at the University of Oxford, has long argued against the biogenesis theory of the STC stromatolites. And he isn't convinced by today's paper.
"Much caution is needed when making claims about the earliest signs of life," he says.
"In rocks of this great age we must assume the hypothesis of a non-biological origin."
Seven new types
The STC stromatolites were first discovered more than 20 years ago when they were declared to most likely be of biological origin.
Subsequent papers argued various alternative theories, including that they were formed by hydrothermal deposits that produced a mineral crust with structures mimicking stromatolites.
Today Allwood reports she has found seven different types of stromatolite, potentially reflecting at least seven different types of organism.
"Stromatolites in the modern environment [are] associated with a whole community of organisms, so potentially we're talking about much more diversity than just seven types of organisms," she says.
But Brasier argues that Allwood and her team have demonstrated the "exact opposite" of biogenesis.
He says if the structures had been made by living things they would have produced uniform, rather than varied, shapes.
The wide range of stromatolites reported in Nature indicates they are actually "self-organising structures of largely physico-chemical origin", he says, like sand dunes or crystal formations.
Similar structures have been produced in the laboratory without microbes, he says.
A window on the evolution of life
Allwood says her research sheds new light not only on when, but how, life began.
She says the first stromatolites appeared as soon as the "carbonate platform" containing formations became submerged by rising sea levels.
"It's like the organisms were literally waiting in the wings for the right conditions to emerge and they just pounced and spread rapidly everywhere," she says.
She says her results also contradict theories that early life emerged and flourished in extreme conditions.
"What we've found is that the hydrothermal activity occurs immediately stratigraphically below and above the STC," she says.
"The rise of the stromatolites occurs as the hydrothermal activity goes away and the fall of the stromatolites occurs when the hydrothermal activity comes back.
"This certainly supports the notion  ...  of life getting a firm foothold and flourishing [in association] with something quite normal."
She says apart from the determination of the antiquity of life on Earth being "an end in itself", her research will help the search for signs of life on other planets, including Mars.
"These sorts of studies are crucial for informing techniques and approaches for detecting biosignatures on Mars and how we'll distinguish them when we get there," she says.
