
A targeted approach to weeds, rather than spraying the whole field, could reduce costs and be safer for humans and the environment
A solar-powered robot could help farmers pinpoint and destroy weeds, significantly reducing the use of herbicides, its developers say.
The autonomous agricultural robot or AgBot has been designed by engineers at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
It uses cameras and vision recognition software to seek out weeds, cut them down and apply a precise amount of herbicide to the root.
The targeted approach requires fewer chemicals and minimises the risk that they will get into the environment, whether carried by wind or water.
Farmers typically apply herbicide to the entire field, making no distinction between crop and weed.
The herbicide can become airborne or, if it rains, leech into ground water. If inhaled or ingested in large quantities, some herbicides can be harmful to people.
Hong Young Jeon, a PhD candidate in agricultural and biological engineering, and Nathanael Gingrich, a master's student at the university, saw an opportunity to address the problem.
Working under the direction of agricultural engineer Associate Professor Lei Tian, the team built a robot about 1.5 metres long and 70 centimetres wide.
Solar powered
A curved solar panel mounted to the top gathers solar energy to charge a battery.
And the battery powers two small cameras, sensors, a GPS for navigation and an electric motor that drives the robot about 5 kilometres per hour.
The panel also serves as a canopy to protect the machine from the elements and provides shade for the vision system.
The vision system, although still in the beginning stages of development, will be designed to recognise the shape and structure of plants and be able to distinguish between a weed and a corn plant.
When a weed is spotted, a robotic arm attached to the front of the machine cuts the weed and then squirts herbicide onto the root.
The vision system will also allow the machine to recognise when it has arrived at the end of a row and to turn down the next lane.
Currently an operator controls the robot, but eventually it will work autonomously. 
And a wireless connection between the robot and a laptop computer could make it easy for the farmer to operate the machine from the comfort of his house.
"The farmer could control everything from the living room," says Jeon.
Worth the cost?
S&oslash;ren Marcus Pederson, a senior research fellow at Denmark's Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University in Frederiksberg, says surveys show that farmers are generally receptive to new technologies. But there has to be an economic advantage.
For example, using a small machine might require less fuel and would not compact the soil the way heavy machinery does. There is a cost associated with the labour needed to undo the compacting that occurs each year, says Pedersen.
But a cost advantage may be hard to see on low-value crops such as rice and corn.
"It's difficult for me to see a huge breakthrough in cereal crops. You have to start to focus on vegetables, potatoes and sugar beets, crops that have a relatively high value," says Pedersen.
Reliable?
And the robot's safety system would have to be reliable enough for it to operate autonomously.
"It's relatively costly to implement safety features on these robotic systems," he says.
"In principle, they can work the whole day, but if there is a requirement that it has to be attended, then you have to limit your time for using these systems."
