
Carbon dioxide produced by burning fossil fuels has been blamed as a factor in climate change
Hundreds of deaths caused by volcanic leaks of carbon dioxide around the world are worrying experts who are researching how to bury industrial emissions of the gas as part of an assault on global warming. 
The concerns come as governments and companies investigate trapping  carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas released by burning fossil fuels, and entombing it in porous rocks deep below the ground.
But they have done little to explain the vast cost and possible risks of projects that advocates say could bury billions of tonnes of gas and do more to slow global warming than a shift to renewable energies like solar or wind power.
"There may be massive public resistance, as we've seen with nuclear power" if governments fail to convince voters that storage is safe, says Dr Bert Metz, co-chair of a 2005 United Nations report on carbon sequestration.
"Public acceptance...is a possible show-stopper if things are not done properly," he said during a recent conference of 1,000 researchers into carbon dioxide technologies in Trondheim, Norway.
Carbon dioxide is a non-toxic gas produced from respiration by animals and plants, making up a tiny 0.04% of the air. 
Levels are up 30% since the industrial revolution and most scientists say the rise is the main spur of global warming. 
Deadly gas
In pure form the gas can cause asphyxia because it is heavier than air and displaces oxygen. 
In the worst case in recent decades, 1,700 people died after a catastrophic 1986 release of 1.2 million tonnes of carbon dioxide from the depths of Lake Nyos in Cameroon, according to the International Energy Agency.
Thirty-seven people died from a similar seismic release from Lake Monoun in Cameroon in 1984.
In 1979, an explosion at Dieng volcano in Indonesia released 200,000 tonnes of the gas, smothering 142 people on the plain below. 
In April this year, three ski patrol workers died at Mammoth Mountain, California, when they were overcome by carbon dioxide while trying to fence off a dangerous volcanic vent.
"Carbon storage is not risk-free but we think the risks are manageable," says Dr Philippe Lacour-Gayet, chief scientist for research and development at Schlumberger oil and gas services group, one of many companies involved in research. 
He and other experts say any greenhouse gas stores would be in geologically stable regions far from earthquake zones and commercial carbon dioxide stores are safely in operation in Norway, Canada and Algeria.
Proponents of carbon storage say the risks pale when compared with the threats of catastrophic climate change, which many scientists say will spur floods, droughts, heatwaves and could spread diseases and raise world sea levels. 
Even so, massive storage could mean pipelines and stores under the countryside from Austria to Australia. 
Convincing the public
And the public may not take kindly to concentrating a normally harmless gas into a more risky form at a likely cost of tens of billions of dollars.
A strong argument for public acceptance is that people accept a host of risks every day - flammable petrol in the fuel tanks of their vehicles, toxic natural gas piped into their homes or electricity generated from nuclear power. 
"All sorts of toxic liquids and gases are already stored underground," says Professor David Reimer, a lecturer in technology policy at the University of Cambridge in England. 
"Carbon dioxide poses a far lesser risk than many accepted hazards."
Berlin has an underground store for explosive natural gas near the stadium where the World Cup soccer competition was played, he says.
And acid gas is stored underground near Edmonton, Canada. 
Carbon dioxide storage sites would have to be carefully chosen, and monitored for centuries.
"I'm more worried about public acceptance of the costs than of the hazards of leaks," says Frederik Hauge, head of the Norwegian environmental group Bellona which favours carbon storage. 
Metz's UN report said that storage could provide 15-55% of all the cuts in greenhouse gas emissions needed until 2100 - probably a bigger contribution than from renewable energies or from any revival of nuclear power.
It estimates that the costs of generating electricity from a coal-fired power plant would typically rise to US$0.06-$0.10 per kilowatt hour with technology to capture and store carbon dioxide from US$0.04-US$0.05 on a power plant with no filters.
Governments will also need to work out liability rules in the case of a leak. 
Most experts suggest companies should initially be responsible but governments would take over, perhaps between five and 20 years after burial.
