
Some of us are 'extreme dreaders' whose brains register more than simple fear
Anyone who has ever waited in dread for the dentist may find some comfort in the findings of a new brain study.
For some people, researchers say, the waiting is indeed the hardest part, and finding a distraction might help.
Their study, published in the journal Science, used the brain-imaging technique of functional MRI to investigate the neural mechanisms underlying dread.
The researchers looked specifically at the agony of waiting to have a painful procedure among 32 volunteers who agreed to have a series of electric shocks to the foot.
Some of them dreaded each shock so much that they repeatedly opted to have a higher-voltage jolt just so they could get it over with more quickly.
These individuals, dubbed 'extreme dreaders', showed greater activity in a brain region related to both pain and attention.
The findings, say the researchers, indicate that dread arises not from simple fear, but from the brain's attention to the unpleasant event.
"The dread is often worse than the event itself," says lead study author Dr Gregory Berns, a professor of psychiatry and behavioural sciences at Emory University School of Medicine in Atlanta.
He says the brain-imaging results are good news because they indicate that extreme dreaders can do something to alleviate the problem.
They can find a distraction - such as meditation, exercise or some other activity - to take the focus off the anticipated event.
Shocking results
For the study, Berns and his colleagues took brain images of volunteers who agreed to endure electrical shocks to their feet.
First, each jolt was preceded by a cue that told participants how intense it would be, for instance 60% of their maximum pain tolerance, and how long they would have to wait for it.
In a second go, participants were presented with choices on how each shock should be delivered, with the voltage and timing of the jolt as the variables.
For example, they could choose between having a shock at 90% of their maximum pain tolerance delivered in the next 3 seconds, or one at 60% intensity in 27 seconds.
Extreme dreaders
Of the 32 volunteers, nine (the extreme dreaders) consistently opted for the stronger shock to avoid the longer wait.
This may seem illogical to many people, Berns says, but for extreme dreaders avoiding the anguished wait makes sense.
And it was the extreme dreaders who showed particularly high activity in the brain's so-called pain matrix during the build-up to their electrical shocks.
Activity was specifically high in areas related to attention, but not in those associated with fear and anxiety.
In other words, extreme dreaders were giving more attention to their foot than 'mild dreaders' were.
