
Kandinsky's Improvisation 31 (Sea Battle), 1913 . Looks good, but how does it sound?
The expressionist painter Wassily Kandinsky wanted people to not only see his paintings but to hear them, says a neuroscientist and expert in the condition known as synaesthesia.
Dr Jamie Ward, a British neuroscientist at University College London (UCL), says the Russian-born French artist knew about synaesthesia, a sensory phenomenon in which one sense can trigger another. 
For example, synaesthetes report being able to taste music, see sounds or hear images.
"What Kandinsky wanted to do was for it to appeal to hearing as well," Ward said during a symposium at the British Association for the Advancement of Science Festival of Science. 
"Kandinsky wanted to make visual art more like music, more abstract. He also hoped that his paintings would be heard by his audiences."
For example, one synaesthete described a Kandinsky painting as having "a huge splurge of sound ... booming and vulgar", "a mousy little meee sound that translates into 'ohs' and 'ahs'" and shapes that "pop up laughing with a 'whooo'".
Ward says it's unknown whether Kandinsky experienced synaesthesia himself.
But the artist certainly knew about the phenomenon, he says.
Linking vision and sound
Synaesthetes make up only about one or two in every hundred people, but Ward believes we all link vision and sound unconsciously and we tend to agree on which images match which sounds.
However, only a tiny minority of us is aware of the crossover in our senses. 
He hypothesised that most people would be able to link an image by someone with synaesthesia to a particular piece of music upon which the image was based.
To test the theory Ward conducted a series of experiments where he asked synaesthetes to draw and describe their vision of music played by the New London Orchestra. 
"We played them musical notes and got them to draw and describe what they see," Ward says. 
A control group without synaesthesia did the same and a professional artist created animations of the images related to the music.
When more than 200 people were shown 100 images and asked to choose the animations that best suited the music they consistently selected the images from the synaesthetes. 
"It's almost as if everybody can appreciate these synaesthetic images even if they don't have synaesthesia," he says.
"Although information from the world enters our heads via different sensory organs ... once they are in the brain they are intimately connected ... in non-random ways."
Synaesthesia, which runs in families, is present from birth but not much is known about what actually causes it.
Ward says studying synaesthesia will help scientists understand how senses and thoughts are linked in out brains. 
He says the next stage of his research will use brain scans to monitor what happens when synaethetes are shown a Kandinsky painting.
