
RNA interference silences genes and so stops DNA from encoding genetic information
RNA interference, whose discovery brought US scientists Professors Andrew Fire and Craig Mello the Nobel Prize in Medicine, is one of the hottest new areas of biotechnology and has spawned its own mini-industry. 
The two researchers discovered that certain types of RNA could silence genes, turning them off and altering a cell's functions.
RNA or ribonucleic acid is the molecule that transmits the genetic information encoded in DNA. 
Plants use the RNA interference, or RNAi, mechanism to fight off viruses and the discovery is being exploited by labs and companies around the world to try to find cures for cancer, certain types of blindness, and even bird flu. 
"It's a classic example of basic research which has turned out to uncover a biological mechanism which now has tremendous potential for ... really impacting human health," says Dr Jeremy Berg, head of the US National Institute of General Medical Sciences, which funded Fire and Mello's work. 
Mello, a professor of molecular medicine at the University of Massachusetts Medical School, and Fire, a professor at Stanford University School of Medicine, made their discovery in the late 1990s.
In 1998 the pair published their discovery in the journal Nature and in 2002 the journal Science named RNAi as the breakthrough of the year.
Clinical trials
Trials using RNA interference to treat people are already under way.
"It has led to clinical trials on age-related macular degeneration but also there are trials for diabetes and HIV and influenza and most anything you can imagine where we know enough to know that overexpression of particular genes is important," Berg says. 
"Cancer, for example, is often caused by overactive genes, and quelling their activity could halt the disease," his institute says. 
RNA interference can also stop HIV, polio, hepatitis C, and other viruses. 
"It is also an incredibly powerful research tool," Berg adds. Researchers can use it to turn off or turn down a gene and see what happens. 
Flipping the 'off' switch
Every cell in the body carries the complete genetic code, written in DNA. These genes cannot all be firing full blast at the same time, so in each type of cell some genes are turned on, or expressing, and most of the others are off. 
"If you can think of a flood coming out of your kitchen sink to the kitchen floor, today's medicines simply act like a mop and mop up the water. With RNA interference we can shut off the [tap]," says Dr John Maraganore, chief executive of Massachusetts-based Alnylam Pharmaceuticals.
Alnylam is working with Merck and Co, Medtronic, Novartis, Biogen Idec and the US government to develop RNAi to treat high cholesterol, respiratory syncytial virus, which can endanger infants, H5N1 avian influenza, the Ebola virus and some types of pain. 
At least 23 different companies are focusing on RNA interference, either for therapy or research.
But analysts caution that technical problems and safety concerns remain to be resolved before RNAi therapies enter the medical vocabulary. 
One problem faced by researchers is how to get the interfering RNA molecules into the body effectively, and different companies are taking different approaches.
Dublin-based company Research and Markets estimated the total value of the RNAi industry at US$1 billion in 2004.
