
Can technology solve airport security issues? Or is a permanent ban on hand luggage the answer?
New technology to screen passengers and hand luggage for explosives is needed, say analysts after last week's airport security alert.
"Quite frankly, metal detectors and x-ray don't cut it," says Chris Yates, aviation security expert at Jane's information group.
"We need to invest. We need to get money into the checkpoint. We need to reassess how we do it ... Perhaps this is the final wake-up call to actually shake the decision makers from their lethargy." 
Current airport security typically involves a five-layered process of screening checked-in luggage, with multiple x-rays and CT scans. 
That is too unwieldy and time-consuming to apply to passengers and their hand luggage.
Instead travellers pass through a metal detector gateway and their bags through an x-ray machine, with a random sample also checked for explosives residue using trace particle detectors. 
What would it take to be able to check all passengers and bags for explosives? 
"It's something which I would imagine could only be solved with either sniffer dogs or electronic sniffers and hand searching. It's a very significant undertaking to do that at somewhere like Heathrow Airport," says David Claridge, managing director of Janusian Security Risk Management in London. 
Jane's analyst Yates says new technology is becoming available, such as quadrupole resonance scanning developed by Australian-based QR Sciences, which uses radio waves to stimulate certain atoms such as nitrogen, present in explosives.
Its scanner, with a traffic-light display to indicate all-clear, further investigation or danger, has already been trialled internationally, including at Manchester Airport. 
Rolling out such technology universally would require time and a huge reallocation of investment which until now has gone into other areas, such as deployment of sky marshals on planes. 
Liquid explosives
An al Qaeda plot to blow up airliners with liquid explosives was uncovered as far back as 1995.
But authorities have never previously banned people from carrying fluids, such as toiletries, onto planes as happened last week.
Though police have given no further details, security analysts say there were indications they were concerned about militants setting off a liquid explosive such as nitroglycerine with some form of non-metal detonator, or combining otherwise harmless liquids on board a plane to produce an explosive mix. 
The future of hand luggage
In the meantime, Yates says he expects the current restrictions on hand baggage to continue, at least for flights into and out of the UK, possibly for months.
He says a permanent ban on hand luggage would be untenable, not least because of the risk of theft from luggage carousels. 
But not everyone rules out such radical solutions. 
"I reckon the days of carry-on luggage are gone," says Maxim Worcester, managing director of Control Risks consultancy in Germany.
"It's the easiest way of solving the problem, isn't it?"
