
Maritime enthusiasts tried to relive Captain Cook's voyage to the Pacific in a replica of his ship Endeavour. But the replica ran aground in Botany Bay in April 2005, the day before it was due to sail into Sydney Harbour. The ship is pictured here, sitting at the Garden Island naval dock, awaiting repairs
Captain James Cook's Endeavour, the 18th century ship he sailed on his epic voyage to Australia, may be one of the four shipwrecks found off the coast of the US, archaeologists say.
The ship is among four from a British fleet used during the US Revolutionary War found off Rhode Island.
Researchers with the Rhode Island Marine Archaeology Project say they believe the ships, and two others previously discovered, are part of a 13-vessel transport fleet intentionally sunk by the British in Newport Harbor in 1778 to keep French ships from landing to aid the Americans' drive for independence. 
The archaeologists says one of the 13 ships in the sunken British fleet was the Lord Sandwich, which records show was once the Endeavour, the vessel Cook used to sail the Pacific Ocean, map New Zealand and survey the eastern coast of Australia in 1768-1771. 
Cook, acknowledged by historians as one of the greatest navigators of all time, is credited with surveying Australia's east coast on the Endeavour expedition.
Archaeologists say it is unclear which ship could be the Endeavour. Seven of the ships in the British fleet have not been found. But they say the latest find raises the chances that one of the discovered ships is the Endeavour. 
"There is a 47% chance that we have our hands on the Endeavour," says DK Abbass, executive director of the Rhode Island Marine Archaeology Project, a nonprofit organisation devoted to studying the state's maritime history. 
She adds it is unlikely anything on the ships would provide a direct link to Cook.
"Quite frankly, we could be working on her right now and never be able to prove it," Abbass says.
It may take years to fully investigate the shipwrecks found so far, Abbass says. 
Using historical materials and sonar, the archaeologists discovered the ships in Narragansett Bay, about about a kilometre off Newport. 
Divers found ballast piles about 9 to 11 metres underwater, with the ship's keel and other parts embedded in the sea floor.
They also found at least one cannon, an anchor with a 5 metre shank and a cream-coloured fragment of an 18th century British ceramic teapot. 
Historically, the finding is significant because it helps tell the story of the siege of Newport, marking France's first attempt to aid the American insurrection against the British. 
Though the effort failed, leaders from each side, George Washington representing the Americans and Comte de Rochambeau for America's French allies, met in Newport two years later, to formalise their cooperation for subsequent battles.
The French ultimately helped the Americans entrap British forces on a peninsula at Yorktown, Virginia.
"So, what you have here is the British are geared up for the colonial rebellion and now they're looking at an international conflict," says Rod Mather, an associate professor of maritime history and underwater archaeology at the University of Rhode Island.
The shipwrecks are Rhode Island property, Abbass says. There are no plans to raise them.
Officials estimate more than two dozen ships from the Revolutionary War period lie beneath Rhode Island's waters. They include British Royal Navy frigates, vessels from the Continental Navy and a French ship.
