
Comatose patients lose their muscle tone, have feeding tubes and often open their eyes, hardly the stuff of movies
Portraying coma patients in movies as 'sleeping beauties' misrepresents reality and could skew the way we think and deal with coma in real life, researchers report.
They say showing people suddenly awakening after years in a coma with no physical or mental problems, or depicting long-term comatose patients peacefully 'sleeping' with perfect grooming and a healthy tan, minus any feeding tubes or loss of muscle tone, is unrealistic.
The concern is that these images become 'real' for everyday people and may well influence the decisions they would make if faced with a similar situation, researchers report in the journal Neurology.
Dr Eelco Wijdicks, a fellow of the American Academy of Neurology, reviewed 30 movies from around the world that depict prolonged coma and found that only two characters showed a reasonably accurate representation.
Wijdicks and colleague then showed clips of scenes from some of the movies to 72 people with no medical training.
More than a third couldn't identify important inaccuracies in the scenes.
For example, 31% shown a comedy scene where a comatose person tapped out a message with his finger in morse code believe it could happen in real life. 
And 39% of those surveyed say they would allow the scenes to influence decisions they make if a family member is in the same situation.
Australian consultant neurologist Associate Professor Richard Burns, who is based at Flinders University and Repatriation General Hospital in Adelaide, says he takes movie scenes of comatose patients with a pinch of salt.
"There is this rare instance where someone does recover from prolonged coma and does seem to be all right. But that would be one in 10,000 or even more. But it does make it difficult when you are explaining to relatives that there is no hope," he says.
Burns says he can't remember a person in a prolonged coma "just suddenly waking up". 
He believes movie makers have a responsibility to depict coma accurately.
[But] it's unrealistic to expect them to do it because they like to show the exceptional."
