
The camel, an ancestor of the dromedary, was four metres tall and roamed the Middle East thousands of years earlier than anyone expected
Remains of a 100,000-year-old giant camel new to science have been found in the Syrian desert, scientists say.
"It was not known that the dromedary was present in the Middle East more than 10,000 years ago," says Swiss researcher Professor Jean-Marie Le Tensorer of the University of Basel.
"Can you imagine? The camel's shoulders stood three metres high and it was around four metres tall, as big as a giraffe or an elephant," he says.
That makes the ancient camel twice as tall as today's dromedaries, or one-humped camels.
"Nobody knew that such a species had existed," he says. 
Tensorer, who has been excavating at the desert site in Kowm since 1999, says the first large bones were found some years ago.
But they were only confirmed as belonging to a camel after more bones from several parts of the same animal were recently discovered.
"We found the first traces of a big animal in 2003, but we were not sure it was a giant camel," he says. 
The scientists also found 100,000-year-old human remains nearby.
Humans apparently killed the camel while it was drinking from a spring, says Tensorer.
Neanderthal or Homo sapiens?
"The bone is that of a Homo sapiens, or modern man, but the tooth is extremely archaic, similar to that of a Neanderthal. We don't know yet what it is exactly. Do we have a very old Homo sapiens, or a Neanderthal?" says Tensorer. 
"We expect to find more bones that would help determine what kind of man it was." 
Humans have been present in what is now modern Syria for 1.5 million years. The area played a key role in the migration of the first human beings towards Asia and Europe, he says. 
Kowm, the site where the remains were discovered along with flint and stone weapons, is a 20 kilometre-wide gap between two mountain ranges that had a number of springs.
The site was first surveyed in the 1960s and evidence of a 1 million-year-old human settlement has been found there.
Basel University researchers say it is considered a "reference for early prehistory in the Near East".
It attracted migrating herds, such as antelope, and humans.
Archaeological layers covering a period of several hundreds of thousands of years were discovered, which is unusual for such an open site, Tensorer says. 
"It was a savannah more or less," he says. "The camels then ate probably what they eat today."
