
It's just not the same any more ...
Dogs feel especially intense jealousy pangs in a 'love triangle' involving their owner and another more recently introduced person or animal, a new study suggests.
The finding suggests dogs may also experience pride, embarrassment, shame and other secondary emotions outside the basic emotions such as anger, anxiety and surprise.
Scientists previously thought only humans and chimpanzees showed behaviours linked to secondary emotions.
A genetic propensity for jealousy may even run as deep as a dog's ancient wolf ancestors, the researchers say.
"I would definitely think you would find jealousy in wolves," says lead researcher Dr Paul Morris.
"For example, sexual jealousy would be an extremely powerful motivator in the wild state. Jealousy would also relate to position in hierarchy and alliances between animals within a pack."
Morris, a University of Portsmouth psychologist and a member of the university's Centre for the Study of Emotion, and colleague Christine Doe studied 1000 domestic animal owners in the south of England.
The researchers asked the pet owners to report observations of both primary and secondary emotions in their animals, which included cats, pigs, horses, rabbits, rats and hamsters, as well as dogs.
All the animals received high scores for secondary emotions, with over 80% of owners saying their dogs showed signs of jealousy.
When Morris and Doe interviewed participants about their observations, owners repeatedly said their pooches seemed jealous when they introduced a new person or animal to the family.
Lost love
Morris also studied the phenomenon directly with his own two dogs, Silver and Jessie. He went out of his way to shower Silver with attention, and then only occasionally gave Jessie her usual pat on the head.
Jessie showed her teeth and snarled, but contained her anger and tried to push her way back into the mini pack.
"Jealousy is at its heart related to the real or anticipated loss of love, affection and attention," says Morris.
"Dog jealousy is different to human jealousy, in that it is tied to the here and now; dog jealousy occurs only in the presence of the interloper. So when I talk about dog jealousy, I see it as a much more primitive and hugely less elaborate version of human jealousy."
A range of emotions
Marc Bekoff, a professor of ecology and evolutionary biology at the University of Colorado, is the author of numerous studies and books on animal emotions, most recently two books co-authored with primate researcher Dr Jane Goodall. He agrees with the new findings.
"I believe that Dr Morris is right. Dogs and other animals do exhibit secondary emotions such as jealousy," he says.
"I've studied the emotional lives of animals for more than 25 years and was pleased to see his results."
Morris, who will present his work on canine jealousy at next month's British Association for the Advancement of Science (BA) Festival of Science in Norwich, next plans to study evidence of guilt in dogs and pride in horses.
