
Embryonic stem cells have been harvested from mouse embryos produced without sperm
Mouse embryos created through a 'virgin birth' process called parthenogenesis show that egg cells can be a source of valued embryonic stem cells, researchers say. 
The cells can be closely matched to the immune system of the recipient, making them a potential source for transplants, the researchers report today in the journal Science. 
There are fewer obstacles to developing these stem cells than by using cloning technology, also called somatic cell nuclear transfer, researchers say. 
"I think it is a much more real-world possibility than nuclear transfer," says Dr George Daley of the Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School in Boston, who led the study. 
If the experiment could be reproduced in humans, such cells might provide an alternative way to produce tailored tissues for transplanting, or for studying disease, Daley says. 
"We are aggressively trying to produce human parthenogenetic embryonic stem cells," he says. 
How did they do it?
The researchers say they have produced dozens of genetically matched mice embryonic stem cell lines by means of a novel procedure called parthenogenesis.
The word comes from Latin and Greek roots meaning virgin beginning and the process occurs when an egg cell starts dividing to produce an embryo without using sperm to fertilise it. 
The researchers generated stem cells from unfertilised mouse eggs, screened them to ensure they would not be rejected by the rodent's immune system and then injected them back into the mouse. 
The customised cells were successfully transplanted and yielded many, but not all, types of specialised tissue, possibly because of the absence of any male DNA. 
The study establishes the principle of using unfertilised eggs as a source of customised embryonic stem cells that are genetically screened to ensure they carry the genes that allow the recipient's immune system to recognise them, making them fit for transplantation therapies.
Scientists have experimented with parthenogenesis in mice before, but this is the first time that the procedure has yielded the embryonic stem cells or so-called master cells that have the potential to develop into any other type of cell in the body. 
The study's authors are particularly encouraged because the unfertilised mice eggs produced embryonic stem cells 70% of the time.
This suggests, the researchers say, that this technique is a much more robust and effective way of generating this highly sought-after genetic material than the current alternative, nuclear transfer. 
Daley says the cell lines could also be studied for a better understanding of the basic biology of disease. 
"For instance, a woman with a genetic condition - some kind of early-onset Parkinson's, bone marrow failure - you could use them as an in vitro model of the disease," he says.
Still, Daley cautions that there are safety concerns with the procedure, which requires the egg to be chemically tricked into spitting out half its genetic material, leaving it with one set of female chromosomes. 
In particular, tissue obtained in this way can carry some risk of cancer and abnormal growth. 
"We'll have to demonstrate the safety and durability of cells from parthenogenetic embryonic stems cells before we could imagine any clinical use," says Daley. 
Human eggs?
Still, Daley and his team have begun experimenting with the procedure in human eggs, using eggs discarded by women undergoing in vitro fertilisation treatment at Boston's Brigham and Women's Hospital.
So far, they have not been successful in isolating human embryonic stem cells from these eggs, which are typically 25 hours old by the time they reach the laboratory.
The research team plans to recruit female volunteers to donate their eggs for research purposes a year or so from now, with the hope that these eggs will deliver better results.
