
Today's satellite is tomorrow's space junk. But is it worth preserving?
Plans to spring-clean space junk orbiting Earth could result in the loss of irreplaceable historical artefacts, an archaeologist warns.
Dr Alice Gorman of Flinders University in Adelaide, an Australian researcher who has previously called for space junk to be World Heritage listed, is on a mission to preserve what she says are heritage items in space.
She plans to take that mission to the Australian Space Development Conference in Canberra in July and to the World Archaeological Congress in Jamaica next year.
Gorman says as space agencies prepare to de-clutter potentially dangerous space junk, it's time to assess the value of some of the millions of objects currently orbiting Earth.
"There are a number of proposals being put forth by a number agencies and [space junk] is recognised as a very serious problem," says Gorman, who is co-chair of the World Archaeological Congress Space Heritage Taskforce.
"There's a window of time now where we can plan to do it right."
Culling the clutter
Space junk ranges from tiny scraps just millimetres in size to whole satellites.
NASA, the European Space Agency and some private organisations are already developing plans to remove it, Gorman says.
While some space junk undergoes an "automatic clean-up regime" by burning up when it re-enters the atmosphere, other items need to be physically removed.
Current proposals include using ground-based lasers to put objects off orbit and speed the rate of their burn-up, sending out 'space tugs' as roving garbage collectors or using tethers to rope and haul in bits of space debris.
"To make that effective you have to be able to discriminate between what's junk and what's not," Gorman says.
Among the items that should recognised for their heritage value are the Vanguard One satellite, launched in 1958 and the oldest human object in space, and FedSat, the Australian designed and built satellite.
Preserving items like these could provide evidence of a nation's presence in space or help reconstruct a history of space exploration, she says.
Woomera
Gorman will present a report on the management of space junk at the World Archaeological Congress next May.
"It will outline ... the heritage of space exploration, what mechanisms exist to manage [space junk], legal boundaries and which sites might be considered part of that heritage," she says.
One of those sites is Woomera, in South Australia, which she says "played a part in a bygone era in Australia".
"And in terms of the development of space exploration it has a much more than local significance," she says.
