
These healthy mice were conceived using sperm from fathers that been sitting in the freezer for years
Sperm extracted from mice and testes that have been frozen for as long as 15 years have yielded normal, healthy offspring in a study that researchers say heralds fresh hopes for bringing back extinct species.
Frozen sperm is now preserved with cryoprotectants, substances that protect it from freezing damage. But defrosted sperm cannot always fertilise an egg.
Researchers from Japan, the UK and Hawaii have now found that sperm can be frozen safely for much longer than previously thought, so long as it is kept in organs or whole carcasses and cooled slowly to -20&deg;C or lower. 
They publish their findings online today in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
The scientists used sperm from whole mice and testes that had been frozen for between one week and 15 years and managed to fertilise eggs via microinsemination to obtain healthy offspring.
"Many people thought that sperm integrity could be retained for several months at most ... but the sperm nucleus is stronger than we expected," says Dr Atsuo Ogura of the Japanese government-funded Riken Bioresource Centre.
"[Sperm nucleus] is good for at least 15 years," he says, adding that offspring of the mouse that had been frozen for 15 years did not appear any different from the others. 
Anyone can do it
The scientists used very simple freezing methods. The mouse that was frozen whole for 15 years was merely kept in a conventional freezer at -20&deg;C, Ogura says.
"This cryopreservation technique is probably the simplest and anyone can do it. Liquid nitrogen is not necessary. Any conventional freezer or dry ice will work very well." 
He says this method of freezing would work for many other mammals because mammalian sperm has special DNA that "retains nucleic activity and keeps the nucleus alive". 
"We can apply this method to many other mammals, it is very simple. Just put the testes or dead body into a freezer." 
But he cautions that carcasses must be allowed to cool slowly, for about two to three hours to reach -20&deg;C. Sperm frozen at lower temperatures would be better preserved.
"Degradation is minimal in liquid nitrogen [-196&deg;C]. Molecules in the cells stay still in this condition, so the degradation will be minimal," he says. 
Hope for IVF, extinct species?
The experiment may also have implications for freezing sperm for future cycles of IVF. 
"This experiment proves that immotile sperm is just as good if frozen in good condition," Ogura says.
Looking ahead, Ogura says this advance gives fresh hopes that extinct species may roam the Earth again.
"Restoration of extinct species could be possible if male individuals are found in permafrost," he says, through injecting the sperm into eggs from females of closely related species.
