
Benzene forms when vitamin C and a preservative combine in the can
Reports of benzene in soft drinks have been confirmed in Australia by government authorities who say the levels pose no health risk.
A spokesperson for Food Standards Australia and New Zealand (FSANZ) says a recent study has found levels of benzene in Australian soft drinks are under 10 parts per billion.
"These levels are very, very low," the spokesperson says. "Five years ago we wouldn't even have been able to detect it."
FSANZ says the main source of benzene exposure for the general population is traffic pollution, air round petrol stations, and active and passive smoking.
The spokesperson says someone would need to drink more than 20 litres of a drink to consume an amount of benzene equal to the amount breathed from city air in a day.
"It's an exceedingly small amount," he says. "We don't believe it poses a health hazard."
But he says any amount of benzene in food is undesirable and FSANZ is working with soft-drink manufacturers to find ways of reducing levels to a minimum.
Vitamin C + preservative = benzene
Benzene, a carcinogen, is found in the environment from natural and man-made sources. 
FSANZ says soft drinks containing ascorbic acid and the preservative sodium benzoate (identified as 211) have traces of benzene.
Ascorbic acid reacts with copper and iron found in water to from hydroxyl radicals and these radicals can react with benzoic acid to form low levels of benzene, says FSANZ.
The World Health Organization guideline for benzene in drinking water is 10 parts per billion and the US Environmental Protection Agency has established a guidelines level in drinking water of 5 parts per billion.
FSANZ plans to release a fact sheet on benzene in soft drinks on its website within a week to 10 days.
Chemical mixtures 
Dr Kate Hughes, a Sydney-based consultant on toxics to government and other organisations, says the response from FSANZ is "disappointing".
"It doesn't really matter whether it's 10 parts per billion or whatever," says Hughes, a former toxics campaigner. "The point is it's there and it's not meant to be there in a food."
She says studies by US scientists have shown that a mixture of small amounts of chemicals in the food chain affect the development of children.
Hughes says that it s also significant that the presence of benzene is an unanticipated reaction between a food additive and vitamin C.
She says it points to the creation of something that can be more toxic than the original two chemicals.
Hughes says although there are now thousands of published examples of such synergistic reactions, health authorities do not generally consider them.
"In the real world hazardous chemicals usually don't come by themselves, they usually come in mixtures," says Hughes.
