
Australian backswimmmers have their very own underwater oxygen supply
Tiny aquatic bugs hitch a ride on air-filled buoyancy bubbles for minutes at a time while they fossick for food, Australian scientists show.
This means the insects, which are about the size of a grain of rice, can stay still and out of harm's way.
Details of how the Australian backswimmer Anisops deanei controls its depth are published today in the journal Nature.
Backswimmers are diving insects that use their broad, oar-like legs to swim on their backs.
While many air-breathing aquatic insects dive with air bubbles, it appears the backswimmers use haemoglobin to help keep them stationary below the surface while waiting for prey.
The trick allows them to dive for food in the safer mid-water zone, rather than scavenge at the surface or cling to submerged objects like most other air-breathing aquatic insects, say the researchers.
This is the ideal hunting zone for tiny aquatic bugs because at a metre below sea level, it's out of the reach of larger predators that hang around the water's surface and those that wait in deeper waters.
Looking at bubbles
Researchers from the University of Adelaide used a sensitive electronic balance and fibre-optic oxygen sensors to measure the gas pressure inside the bubble the backswimmer carries.
They found that the insect uses a strategy much like a diver with a buoyancy vest to control the depth at which he or she hovers in the water.
Backswimmers breath in a bubble of oxygen they take with them on their dive. 
And they maintain buoyancy by releasing oxygen from the haemoglobin in their bodies, explains PhD candidate Philip Matthews from the Department of Environmental Biology.
"The haemoglobin [acts as an] oxygen tank, so the backswimmer can carry oxygen down from the surface in this tank and then breath into their bubble as they need it before resurfacing again," he says.
Backswimmers, found the world over, are the only insects to inhabit the mid-water zone as adults, and the only ones to possess haemoglobin throughout their entire life, a link that may be explained by the new findings.
