
The new combustor injects fuel and air separately into the chamber through devices that look like drinking straws
The developers of a new combustion chamber that uses a simple and inexpensive design to burn fossil fuels say it emits almost no nitrogen oxide, a big contributor of smog and acid rain.
The combustor, developed by Assistant Professor Ben Zinn and his team at the Georgia Institute of Technology, is not suitable for the ever-fluctuating environment of a car's engine. 
But it could replace the steady-state combustion chambers of industry and power generation, which the US Environmental Protection Agency says spews more than half of all energy-related emissions into the atmosphere. 
Until now, developing a low-emission combustor has proven challenging for a couple of big reasons.
For fuel to burn, it must be mixed with air. Conventional combustors premix the air with the fuel and inject the mixture into the bottom of a tube-shaped chamber.
Inside the chamber, the molecules are set aflame at temperatures over 1800&deg;K. At those temperatures, the air molecules break down and their two main elements, nitrogen and oxygen, begin to react and form nitrous oxide and carbon monoxide.
Before the new molecules can be burned, they escape through the top of the tube as emissions. Premixed fuel can also cause flames to flash back, burning the fuel nozzle.
Engineers have tried several strategies for reducing flashback and emissions, among them burning the fuel mixture at temperatures lower than 1800&deg;K. But the lower the temperature the weaker the flame and the more likely that it will experience 'blow out'.
"It's like having a very weak candle flame. Every time there is a breeze, it blows out. It's not very robust," says Zinn. "In our system, we can go to the lower temps without losing the flame."
The new device, called a stagnation point reverse flow combustor, is robust because of its fairly simple design, say its developers.
Instead of being tube-shaped, it is designed more like a drinking glass - open on the top and sealed on the bottom.
Over the top of the chamber is a special injector that looks like a skinny straw inserted into a fat straw.
Fuel flows through the skinny straw down into the chamber; air flows into the chamber through the fat straw.
The ingredients move down the centre of the chamber, mix, ignite and burn in a low-temperature flame.
Once they reach the bottom of the chamber, the molecules move to the wall of the chamber and begin to rise in an attempt to escape.
But on their way back up, they come into contact and ignite the mixture of fuel coming down.
"Ben Zinn is one of our country's best combustion scientists," says Richard Dennis, turbine technology manager at the US Department of Energy's National Energy Technology Laboratory.
"He seems to get around two big issues: the premixing issue of fuels and air and the [flashback] issue. And he seems to do this in a simple geometry."
According to Zinn, when the combustion process occurs stably at temperatures below 1800&deg;K, only one nitrous oxide molecule in one million escapes to the environment.
Before such technology could make it to market, though, it will have to be rigorously tested.
"Ben needs to produce more data that validates the performance and does it at conditions that are relevant to the application," says Dennis.
Zinn thinks that in about a year, he could have the device working on residential water heaters or industrial boilers. 
It would take several more years, but the combustor could one day be incorporated into gas turbines for power generation and even into aeroplane engines, he says.
