
The ability to plan for the future has been around for at least 14 million years, scientists say, when the apes shared a common ancestor
Apes plan for the future, according to new research that questions whether humans are the only animals to think ahead.
German research published today in the journal Science says apes can choose an appropriate tool to reach a treat and save the tool for the future instead of using it immediately.
The researchers, from the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, say that planning for future, not just current, needs is one of the most formidable human cognitive achievements.
This is because it imposes a long delay between performing an action and being rewarded for it.
The researchers let bonobo chimpanzees and orangutans select tools to reach grapes and juice bottles. 
They chose appropriate tools half of the time, took them to their sleeping rooms then used them up to 14 hours later when retrieving the treats. 
Both species show the skill, the researchers say, suggesting it evolved at least 14 million years ago, when all great ape species shared a common ancestor.
"Our results suggest that future planning is not a uniquely human ability, contradicting the notion that it emerged in hominids only within the past 2.5 to 1.6 million years," they write.
First evidence of its kind
Associate Professor Thomas Suddendorf, a psychologist from Australia's University of Queensland, says this is the first published evidence that apes save tools for future use.
Suddendorf, who comments on the study in the same issue of Science, says the findings also give a glimpse of our evolutionary past and provide a starting point from which researchers can begin to reconstruct the evolution of the human mind.
"The fact that such simple performance of great apes is exciting reminds us how special and precious our foresight really is. It is so common that we take it for granted," he says.
But he says there is no evidence yet that apes can anticipate a future mental state. For example, there is no evidence they can anticipate being thirsty when they're not currently thirsty.
How about other animals?
Scrub jays, birds found in the Americas, are animals that also plan for the future, the scientists say. These birds move their food around to decrease the chance of it being stolen.
Suddendorp says some species that appear to be planning for the futures, say by building nests or hoarding food, are actually using instinctive behaviour or associative learning.
