
The conditions that determine whether a male will grow up gay may be present before birth, research suggests
The last male child in a family of many boys is more likely to be gay than a boy who is born first or has fewer brothers, according to new research.
The Canadian study, published in the US Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences online journal, suggests that being gay starts in the womb.
The study, led by Dr Anthony Bogaert of Brock University near Toronto, found that having older brothers increases a man's chance of being gay, even if the older brothers don't live with the younger sibling.
Adopted or step brothers don't appear to have an effect.
"The most consistent bio-demographic correlate of sexual orientation in men is the number of older brothers (one has) and not social influences," Bogaert reports. 
"Only biological older brothers, and not any other sibling characteristic, including non-biological older brothers, predicted men's sexual orientation, regardless of the amount of time reared with these siblings." 
There's no evidence that similar patterns apply to girls, he says.
Fraternal birth order effect
The results are a variation of the so-called "fraternal birth order effect" theory on homosexuality in men. 
The researchers didn't investigate the mechanism at play, but Bogaert says his study indicates that biological, rather than social or child-rearing factors, are at play.
One possible explanation is that during pregnancy a mother's immune system recognises male foetuses as foreign and creates "maternal anti-male antibodies".
These antibodies could affect the part of the brain that determines sexuality.
The effect is cumulative and therefore more likely to cause homosexuality in the last of several sons born to the same mother.
"These results support a prenatal origin to sexual orientation development in men and indicate that the fraternal birth order effect is probably the result of a maternal "memory" for male gestations or births," he says.
Female foetuses aren't affected because mothers are themselves female, so the mother doesn't create antibodies against daughters. 
Bogaert reports that the age of the mother also appears related to the sexual orientation of her sons, "with homosexual men's mothers being significantly younger than the mothers of heterosexual men".
Gay staircase effect?
Professor Roger Short, a reproductive biologist in the faculty of Medicine at Melbourne University, says there could be a social element in younger brothers with lots of older male siblings becoming gay.
"I wouldn't be surprised if you come from a large unisex family where you're one boy amongst many, and the last in the line, that you've got a slightly socially deprived environment," he says.
"That could make you more aligned with ... the same sex because you'd be so ignorant and terrified about the opposite sex."
But he says while having a female "sandwiched" between two males in utero can have a masculising influence in species like rats and mice, there's no biological evidence for Bogaert's theory of maternal antigens producing gay boys.
"No one's ever suggested that maternal antibodies to something produced by a male foetus could have a long lasting effect to act on subsequent male foetuses," he says.
"So each subsequent male foetus would be a little more gay than the one before it.
"You would have a sort of gay staircase effect."
