
New research into how HIV replicates in the gut may help to explain why antiviral therapy doesn't work for all patients
HIV replicates in the lining of the gut and does much of its damage to the immune system there, researchers say.
Professor Satya Dandekar, at the University of California Davis Health System, and colleagues report their findings in the latest issue of the Journal of Virology.
Dandekar says the study is the first to explain why the drug cocktails that HIV patients take so often fail to work completely. 
"The real battle between the virus and exposed individuals is happening in the gut immediately after viral infection," she says. 
"We need to be focusing our efforts on improving treatment of gut mucosa, where massive destruction of immune cells is occurring.
"Gut-associated lymphoid tissue accounts for 70% of the body's immune system. Restoring its function is crucial to ridding the body of the virus."
HIV cannot be cured but the drugs, known as highly active antiretroviral therapy, or HAART, can keep the virus under control. 
At first, doctors had hoped that years of treatment might eventually eradicate the virus. 
But, 25 years on from the advent of AIDS, it is clear that cannot happen. That is because the virus can hide out quietly in reservoirs, which include certain immune cells. 
The gut is clearly important too, Dandekar's team says. 
"We found a substantial delay in the time that it takes to restore the gut mucosal immune system in those with chronic infections," Dandekar says.
"In these patients the gut is acting as a viral reservoir that keeps us from ridding patients of the virus." 
The mucosa are the wet tissues that line the nose and throat, the genitals and the inside of the gut. HIV often infects people via the mucosa.
Long-term survivors
Dandekar's team has been studying HIV-infected patients who, even without treatment, have survived more than 10 years with healthy immune systems, including the T-cells that the virus attacks. 
"We looked at their gut lymphoid tissue and did not see loss of T-cells there. This correlated with better clinical outcomes," Dandekar says. 
So they started the current study, following 10 patients being treated with HAART, taking blood and gut samples before and after three years of treatment. 
They found evidence of inflammation, which disrupts tissue function, promotes cell death and upsets the normal balance of gut bacteria. 
Dandekar say these findings suggest anti-inflammatory drugs may help HAART to work better.
