
New research suggests the habitat changed from dry, arid and cold to warm and wet, which led to new types of vegetion mammoths couldn't eat
The mammoth and other species probably became extinct more than 10,000 years ago because of climate shifts, not over-hunting by humans, new research suggests.
Radiocarbon dating of 600 bones of bison, moose and humans that survived the mass extinction and remains of the mammoth and wild horse that did not, suggests humans were not responsible. 
"That is what this new data points out," says Emeritus Professor Dale Guthrie of the University of Alaska in Fairbanks, author of the paper in today's issue of the journal Nature. 
"It is not that people weren't hunting these creatures. But climate would have reduced the numbers considerably," he adds. 
Scientists have put forward various theories to explain the disappearance of the mammoth and the wild horse, Equus ferus, which coincided with the arrival of humans from central Asia in North America more than 12,000 years ago.
One hypothesis suggests a virulent disease was responsible for the extinctions. Another theory was that by killing grazing animals, humans triggered changes in vegetation that resulted in the mass deaths. 
The Blitzkrieg, or overkill theory, says human hunters devastated most large mammal species and drove some to extinction. 
"But contrary to that theory, my dates show numbers of bison and [elk] were expanding both before and during human colonisation," Guthrie explains.
His radiocarbon research shows there was a 1000-year difference between the demise of the wild horse and the woolly mammoth which Guthrie says is inconsistent with other theories.
Instead, he suggests climate shifts transformed the dry, arid and cold region. The wetter, warmer summers led to changes in vegetation to which mammoths and wild horses could not adapt. 
"The new patterns of dates indicate a radical ecological sorting during a uniquely forage-rich transitional period, affecting all large mammals, including humans," Guthrie adds.
