
Our ability to count emerged in stages, linguists say. The latest evolutionary stage allowed us to name lanes on a racetrack 1, 2 and 3 as well as describe which runner came in 1st, 2nd or 3rd
We can thank our verbal nature, along with our fingers, for the ability to develop complex number systems, a new study suggests.
The authors theorise that language and maths co-evolved in humans, with language probably emerging just ahead of basic mathematical concepts.
"I do not think counting words were among the first words spoken by our species, because their application makes use of a fairly sophisticated pattern of linking that occurred ... relatively late in linguistic evolution," says author Dr Heike Wiese, whose study has been accepted for publication in the journal Lingua.
Wiese, a linguist at the University of Potsdam in Germany, says that our use of counting words, and numbers in general, probably emerged in four stages.
During the first stage, Wiese believes humans began using visual representations, such as symbols or other markings, to correspond with verbal indications of quantity.
Among the early evidence for that stage is a 30,000-year-old wolf bone, excavated in the Czech Republic, with notched tallies cut into it.
The second stage of development, according to the new study, was the evolution of finger counting.
Our hands are like a built-in abacus: the physiology that allows us to bend fingers individually also allowed the emergence of our ability to count in sequence.
During the third stage, Wiese thinks emphasis began to be placed on the last word or finger in a counting series.
This emphasis seems to be inherent to human thinking. For example, when a child who is learning to count is asked how many teddy bears he or she has, the child gives the whole sequence of numbers and then puts emphasis on the last word, as in, "I have one, two, three, four teddy bears."
Since humans have 10 fingers, that number became a natural transition point during this stage, allowing people to count upward in sets of 10.
Finally, Wiese believes "a full-blown number concept" emerged in humans with the use of stable word-lists linked to amounts. Counting words and numbers, he says, do not merely refer to numbers. They are the numbers.
"The idea is that numbers are not some abstract platonic entities that must be grasped by us, but mental tools that we develop ourselves: tools we use to assess properties like cardinality (four buses), rank (the fourth bus), and identity (the number four bus)," he says.
Counting words and mathematical concepts, therefore, are intertwined with our language skills, and even appear to be dependent upon them. Though the reverse is not the case.
Some cultures, such as the hunter-gatherer Piraha of the Amazon, have language but do not even possess systems for numbers or counting.
Professor Terrence Deacon, a linguist at the University of California at Berkeley, agrees with many of the conclusions of Wiese's study.
"Wiese builds the case for numerical cognition growing out of the symbolic cognition at the base of language - not as a parasitic spin-off, or a mere naming of numerical concepts, but as an ability whose roots extend to the same underlying cognitive operations," he says.
Several recent studies support the language-maths link.
In a study published last month in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Professor Yiyuan Tang and colleagues found that Chinese and English speakers not only have different ways of representing numbers with language, they also think about numbers with different parts of their brains.
Yet another study, conducted by Miami-Dade County Public School researchers in Florida, found that bilingual individuals do better at maths than their monolingual peers.
