
Compounds isolated from mangoes could be used to treat metabolic disorders, early research suggests
A mango a day may one day protect against diabetes and high cholesterol, a preliminary study suggests.
The study is analysing how individual components of the luscious summer favourite affect human cells.
And early results, presented at the Australian Health and Medical Research Congress in Melbourne this week, suggest that some mango components act on the same pathways that diabetes and cholesterol drugs target.
University of Queensland PhD student Ashley Wilkinson says the study, the first of its kind, aims to find unique ingredients in mangoes and other tropical fruit like paw paws.
"There's been a lot of research looking at nutritional bioactives but it's focused on more temperate fruit and vegetables like broccoli and grapes. And there hasn't been any research looking at tropical fruit in the context of looking at modulating cellular processes," she says.
Dr Sarah Roberts-Thomson of the university's school of pharmacy, who is supervising the work, says early results suggest some compounds in mangoes work by activating or inhibiting groups of receptors known as peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors, or PPARs.
"We don't know yet how the whole thing's going to play out but we know some of the individual components activate these receptors or even inhibit them," she says.
"That could end up with positive nutritional health benefits for diabetes and high cholesterol."
PPARs are also increasingly being linked to colon and breast cancer, and the study will investigate whether compounds in mangoes can also kill cancerous cells. 
One of the compounds the researchers are focusing on is quercetin, a chemical also found in onions.
Another is norathyriol, a by-product of mangiferin, which is found in a range of fruits and traditional antidiabetic herbs.
Gut bacteria convert mangiferin into norathyriol, Wilkinson says. Once converted, it appears to have an even more potent affect on PPARs.
Preliminary findings also suggest that mango skin, often a component of mango juice, is particularly rich in these compounds, Roberts-Thomson says.
A long way down the track these compounds could be isolated to form alternative treatments for metabolic disorders like diabetes and high cholesterol, she says.
The study is being conducted with the Queensland Department of Primary Industries.
