
Male praying mantises have one of two types of genitalia, say researchers, the first time anyone has seen this type of dimorphism in insects
Some praying mantises have genitalia that hang to the left and others to the right, says a behavioural ecologist.
But Greg Holwell, an Australian post-doctoral researcher at Macquarie University, says he doesn't know why.
Holwell reported this unusual trait at the recent Australasian Association for the Study of Animal Behaviour conference in Sydney.
Holwell travelled to Queensland hoping to study sexual cannibalism in praying mantises, or mantids. But he got more than he bargained for.
Rather than finding examples of females eating males, he found a unique case of dimorphism, where there are two distinct forms of a particular species.
He found the males of the species Ciulfina are identical except they have genitalia that are the mirror image of each another.
"Their genitalia point in one direction or the other, which is a very unusual phenomenon," says Howell.
He knows they are both the same species because he's mated left and right-handed males with females and they've produced offspring that have survived. DNA studies also show they are the same species.
"This is really a big thing," he says.
A rare find
Dimorphism is quite common, for example, males and females of the same species. But it is extremely rare within a particular sex, says Holwell.
"What's even rarer is dimorphism in genitalia," he says.
This is why so many species distinctions, particularly in insects, normally rely on differences in genitalia.
Holwell says there are only two other known cases of dimorphism in genitalia, one involving female spiders and other involving male thrips.
But the mantids are the first to show mirror-image genitalia.
"It may just be a genetic mutation that's occurred at some point and because left and right-handed males don't have any particular advantage over another, both forms have survived in the population," he says.
The male mantid's genitals consist of a number of components that enable the male to stimulate the female, attach to her and transfer packets of sperm called spermatophores.
The females are perfectly symmetrical, says Holwell, which means asymmetrical males must twist their abdomen to mate with the females. 
The direction of the twist depends on which way they hang.
More strange behaviour
Holwell's colleagues have also found that when males transfer a sperm packet to females, some of it is inserted into the female and some is left hanging out.
"Some time after mating the female does a kind of a yoga twist, pulls her abdomen up to her face, pulls the spermatophore out and eats it," says Holwell.
The researchers want to find out whether the female eats empty sperm packets, which means she is just 'tidying up'.
But Holwell says if she removes packets still containing sperm, this might be her way of controlling which male gets to fertilise her.
