
Scientists say they can genetically engineer cotton plants to remove a toxic compound, making cottonseed fit for humans to eat
Scientists say they have found a way of using the cotton plant to feed potentially half a billion people a year.
Texas A&M University plant biotechnologist Associate Professor Keerti Rathore and colleagues report they have genetically altered the plant to reduce the levels of the toxic chemical gossypol in cottonseed, making it fit for humans to eat.
"It actually tastes pretty good. It reminds me of chickpea. It's a fairly good-tasting seed," he says. 
"It tasted better than soybean, I can tell you that," adds Rathore, who publishes the team's research in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
The protein-rich, GM cottonseed could be ground into a flour and made into bread and other foods, he says. 
Rathore and his team turned to a technique also being used in cancer and AIDS research.
They used so-called RNAi or RNA interference technology that can 'silence' a gene to cut the amount of gossypol in the cottonseed.
When humans eat gossypol it can damage their heart and liver. 
The researchers left gossypol intact in the rest of the plant because it guards against insects and disease. 
"So the trick is not to affect the levels of these compounds in the rest of the plant, but eliminate it from the seed only. And that's what we have done," Rathore says. 
This cottonseed could serve as a high-protein food for the world's hungry, and falls well within the criteria set by the World Health Organization and US Food and Drug Administration for food consumption, the researchers say.
"Potentially, if all of the cottonseed today which is produced can be utilised for human nutrition directly, it can meet the protein requirements of 500 million people on an annual basis," Rathore says. 
Wasted protein
"That is a lot of protein right now really being wasted," he adds, noting that cottonseed often is fed to cattle because bacteria in their stomachs can break down gossypol.
The chemical is present naturally within the glands in the above-ground parts of the cotton plant. 
For millennia, people have spun cotton fibres into clothing and other fabrics. But for each kilogram of cotton fibre, the plant produces 1.6 kilograms of seed, Rathore says.
Cotton is grown in more than 80 countries worldwide. With the exception of the US and Australia, he says, it is grown primarily in developing countries.
Researchers estimate that it will take at least another decade to develop cotton varieties with these qualities for broad commercial production. 
In the 1950s and 1960s, agricultural scientists bred cotton varieties that had no gossypol glands. But they were a commercial flop because the absence of the toxin made the plants too vulnerable to insects and disease. 
In addition to edible cottonseed, the RNAi technique might be applied to other crops with toxic components, such as fava beans, to increase their use, the researchers say.
