
Bored with khaki? Scientits say new fibres could one-day be used to make camouflage clothing change colour
A new conductive plastic that changes colour in response to an electric field could be used in products from hue-switching camouflage gear to flexible computer displays, researchers say.
The electrochromic polymers, developed by Dr Greg Sotzing, an associate professor at the University of Connecticut, are said to be longer and more flexible than other conductive polymers, which are short and brittle.
"You want them to be long in length to twist them together to make thread or yarn," says Sotzing.
But it's the rigidity of the chemical structure that helps conductive polymers carry a charge in the first place.
Until now, that stiff structure has limited how such polymers can be processed into fibres and other useful materials.
Sotzing and his team devised a two-step method to convert flexible, non-conductive "precursor polymers" into long, conductive fibres.
Lots of goo
The first step is to melt or dissolve the precursor polymer into a gooey solution. 
The researchers then apply a voltage to a special syringe and squeeze the solution through it. This process doesn't charge the polymer, but helps to evaporate solvents.
As a result, the polymers harden and become tangled together like the strands of a rope.
Polymers extruded by the new method can be lengthened up to about a metre and potentially much longer, the researchers say.
At first, the fibres appear white. If the researchers dip them into a chemical solution that removes electrons, the fibres become conductive and darken to a deep blue. If the researchers apply an electric charge to add electrons, the colour changes to bright orange.
Dr Shawn Williams is vice-president of technology at Pittsburgh-based Plextronics, a company that develops conductive polymer technology for electronic devices.
"For a long time, people have known about electrochromic polymers, but they haven't figured out how to put them into formats that are useable and practical," he says. 
What Sotzing has done, says Williams, is create a conductive polymer with the versatile properties of a regular polymer.
Fabric that changes colour
The trick for making the fibres useful for colour-changing fabrics, according to Williams, is to control the fibres on the scale of a single pixel.
Threads with different charges could be woven together with thin metal wires designed to deliver various voltages, with the intersection between a thread and a wire serving as a pixel.
Changing the voltage with an embedded battery would result in different colours.
A fabric woven with the polymer fibres could be used, for example, in t-shirts bearing video advertisements or jackets that double as computers. The material could also be used by soldiers to blend into both forested and urban environments.
Sotzing says he is speaking to both a US and international company about commercialisation.
