
Tsunami-hit Pangandaran beach.  The death toll rose towards 300 on Tuesday after a strong undersea earthquake triggered a tsunami that smashed into fishing villages and resorts (Reuters/Dadang Tri)
Indonesians fleeing this week's tsunami that lashed the south coast of Java had no warning, with a countrywide early warning system not due to be in place until 2009, officials say.
Plans for such a system in Indonesia were drafted in the wake of the devastating 2004 Asian tsunami, but only two out of 25 planned sensor buoys have been deployed so far, off Sumatra, not Java, officials say. 
"Our system is not yet working properly. We are still developing a communication system especially for the regions," says Fauzi, an official working on the early warning project from the meteorology agency in Jakarta.
He says only two sensor buoys were in place on Sumatra but that nothing had yet been installed off Java. 
Edi Prihantoro, from Indonesia's Ministry of Science and Technology, says even those two sets of buoys and ocean-bottom pressure sensors, activated off western Sumatra last November by Indonesian and German scientists, were not working. 
"According to a grand scenario we will have up to 25 buoys that can monitor ocean phenomena, but until now we have deployed only two buoys. They have some problems and are on land," he says. 
The system was slated to be in place by the end of 2008, he says. 
A lack of funds to buy and maintain the buoys was delaying the implementation of the system, he says, arguing that not only Indonesia should pay for its upkeep. 
"We still are discussing budget and maintenance. But I think other countries must also be taking care of it. They get all the ocean data from us, it seems unfair if they don't take responsibility for that," he says. 
Prihantoro says the German and Chinese governments had so far donated funds for the system but that it would be expensive to set up across Indonesia.
If installed as planned, buoys along Indonesia's vast archipelago working in conjunction with more than 100 seismographs would detect the speed of seismic waves to determine whether there was a risk of a tsunami. 
Data would be analysed and relayed automatically through mobile phone text message or email to officials who could then inform residents. 
But getting the message through to them could still prove a challenge.
Even if Java had had a system in place on Monday, it is doubtful many of the small fishing villages along Java's south coast would have received any SMS warnings as mobile reception is limited and many people are too poor to own phones. 
"It is not enough to warn people through TV and radio. The problem is direct communication to communities on the ground," says Fauzi. 
He says the most direct way to alert residents would be sirens on beaches. 
"This year we will build three siren systems in Aceh, West Sumatra and Bali. We will build one in Java next year," he says. 
Indonesia sits on the so-called Pacific Rim of Fire, where the meeting of continental plates causes high volcanic and seismic activity. 
It lacked a warning system when a massive quake hit off Sumatra on 26 December 2004, unleashing a tsunami that swept up to 7 kilometres inland and killing some 220,000 people in 11 countries around the Indian Ocean.
