
The vehicle combines the best of a helicopter and fixed wing aircraft, say researchers. It stands 1.5 metres high and has a wingspan of 2.4 metres
A new unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) that takes off vertically like a helicopter and then flips over to fly forward like a conventional plane is being developed by Australian researchers.
The T-Wing could provide cheaper and more efficient surveillance and reconnaissance, says Dr Hugh Stone of the University of Sydney whose team has been carrying out test flights.
"It can take off and land like a helicopter," says Stone, an aeronautical engineer who began the research as a PhD project. "It doesn't need a runway." 
While helicopters can take off and land vertically and can hover, they are not as efficient at forward flight as conventional aircraft, which means they don't tend to fly as fast or as far.
This is why 'convertiplanes' were developed, aerial vehicles that convert from helicopter to plane mode.
Other UAV convertiplanes use helicopter type propeller blades and more complex and expensive technology to control the movement of the vehicle, says Stone.
But the T-Wing uses fixed propellers, like a standard aircraft.
Moving flaps that sit in the airstream behind the propellers are responsible for changing the direction of the aircraft and allow it to hover.
These flaps are controlled by an onboard computer system that detects and changes the plane's location and orientation.
"We can basically tell it a set of points in space and we upload those to the vehicle and then it will fly through those points," says Stone. "It doesn't need any intervention from us."
Unstable
Like other similar vehicles the T-Wing is quite unstable and the flaps have to move 50 times a second to keep the vehicle hovering.
While it is not possible to fly the aircraft by radio control from the ground, it is possible to communicate with the onboard computer system in an emergency.
"We can intervene if something starts to go wrong," says Stone.
So far the team has successfully tested a prototype that is 1.5 metres high with a 2.4-metre wingspan and weighs 30 kilograms.
In the tests, the aircraft flew autonomously, except while landing when it had some assistance from radio control on the ground. The team plan to do further testing in December.
Surveillance
Stone says UAVs are generally equipped with cameras and used for surveillance and reconnaissance.
The research has been funded by the Australian Research Council, the University of Sydney and a US$30,000 grant (A$39,000) from the US Air Force.
Stone says his team is working with Australian technology company Sonacom to develop a commercial version of the aircraft for surveillance applications.
