
When black holes collide, they spiral towards each other then shed vast amounts of energy as space-ripping gravity waves
Powerful ripples that rend the fabric of space as black holes collide have been simulated for the first time by a supercomputer, finally giving astronomers something specific to watch for with new gravity wave telescopes. 
Black holes, collapsed stars tens to billions of times more massive than the Sun, are believed to merge fairly often in the cosmos, as they get trapped by each other's gravity. 
When it happens, they spiral towards each other and shed up to 40% of their energy in the form of powerful, space-torturing gravity waves, according to the new simulation. 
These waves propagate through the universe and researchers say the waves ought to be detectable with the right equipment.
"For years we didn't know what to expect," says Dr Joan Centrella, chief of the Gravitational Astrophysics Laboratory at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Maryland. 
The researchers used the world's fourth-fastest computer, NASA's Columbia supercomputer, to crunch the numbers in some of Einstein's toughest equations regarding black holes.
They've come up with a basic gravity wave signature of a black hole merging process from start to finish. 
"Now we have Einstein's prediction," she says. "This is a conceptualisation that we didn't have until now." 
Computer power
The new gravity wave simulation is the culmination of three decades of research that, until recently, required more computer power than was available.
The results are being published in the journals Physical Review Letters and Physical Review D. 
"For a long time they'd just crash and burn," she says of earlier computerised attempts to run Einstein's equations on the theory of general relativity. 
In the end, it took a fifth of Columbia's parallel computer processors about 80 hours to crunch the complex 90-year-old equations.
Added up processor-by-processor, the calculations took more than 18 years of processor time, Centrella says. 
The researchers were pleased to discover one of their results.
Regardless of the different possible orbits and speeds two black holes have when they begin to merge, they end up producing the same signature wave patterns as they near the end of their collision, Centrella says.
That should make them pretty easy to identify. 
The next step will be to detect some actual gravity waves and see if they match the simulation. That will be, in effect, one tremendous test of Einstein's work on black hole theory, says Centrella. It will also mark the genuine birth of a whole new field of astronomy.
"Black holes play a key role in gravitational wave astronomy," says astronomer Professor Peter Saulson of Syracuse University in New York. "They will be the primary source of gravity waves." 
Searching for gravity waves
Saulson works on the Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO) in Hanford, Washington, which started searching the skies for gravity waves late last year. 
LIGO, with its 4 kilometre-wide antenna, ought to be able to detect gravity waves from the collisions of smaller black holes, says Saulson. 
As for the far larger supermassive black holes found at the centres of galaxies, their gravity waves will require a space-borne observatory that can detect much lower frequency gravity waves, he says. 
That's the goal of NASA's Laser Interferometer Space Antenna, which will have three spacecraft 3 million miles apart and linked by lasers, due to be launched in 2015.
