
Light behaves in weird ways when you shine it through special materials
Light does something weird when you shift it into reverse, scientists say. It moves faster than the speed of light.
Two research teams independently reported the counter-intuitive behaviour, observed in two very different experiments, in a recent issue of the journal Science.
"This is just so mind-boggling that it cries out for attention," says Professor Robert Boyd, an optics expert at the University of Rochester in New York.
He and his colleagues triggered the odd trick using optical fibre laced with the element erbium, the same kind of fibre used in telecommunications.
They split a burst of laser light, sending one beam through the optical fibre and allowing the other to travel without interference.
Oddly enough, the first beam's peak exited the far end of the fibre way ahead of the peak of the comparison pulse.
Odder still, the exiting peak escaped even before the original peak had entered the fibre.
What had happened was that as soon as the leading edge of the original pulse entered the fibre, the fibre instantly cloned an identical pulse at the far end. That cloned peak exited before the rest of the original had been introduced.
At the same time, another cloned pulse fired backward through the fibre to cancel out the original.
So ultimately, one pulse entered and one emerged, but with timing that appeared to violate light's natural speed limit.
To test if the pulse was travelling backward as it seemed, the team shortened the fibre a few centimetres at a time and repeated the experiment.
By adding the experiments together in sequence, they watched the beam's backward progression.
The fibre itself, they conclude, instantly reconstructed the pulse at the far end, simultaneously sending another pulse backward.
Not once, but twice
German researchers made a similar observation in an independent experiment at the Universit&auml;t Karlsruhe. 
A team led by Gunnar Dolling sent a pulse of light through material whose unusual properties allow it to bend light in unexpected ways.
Dolling and colleagues also witnessed the very same backward, faster-than-light behaviour as the Rochester team.
"The propagation of [light] waves through dispersive media often leads to surprising or counterintuitive behaviour," report Dolling and colleagues, referring to dispersion as the ability of a material to separate light into different wavelengths, or colours.
These and other experiments with weird light are suddenly possible because of new light-dispersive materials, more sensitive technology to detect what light is doing, and because optics researchers are simply paying more attention to the strange things light does in odd materials.
"Up until several years ago people were not familiar with the concepts of slow and fast light," says Boyd.
