
The discovery of cosmic ripples just after the Big Bang explains why the universe is lumpy and not a smooth sheet of matter or energy
US scientists Dr John Mather and Professor George Smoot have won the 2006 Nobel prize for physics for finding the background radiation that finally nailed down the Big Bang theory of the origin of the universe. 
The discovery of these 'cosmic ripples' was lauded in 1992 by cosmologist Professor Stephen Hawking as "the greatest discovery of the century, if not of all time".
While most physicists do not go that far, they are universal in their praise of the experiment, in which the pair and their team designed a satellite and used it to find proof of the Big Bang. 
Mather, from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, and Smoot, from University of California, Berkeley, found faint variations in microwave radiation that dated back to just 300,000 years after the fiery birth of the universe. 
These ripples in the microwave radiation, they say, were the primordial framework on which the galaxies, stars and other stuff of the universe took shape.
It explains why the universe is lumpy and not a smooth sheet of matter and energy. 
"The discovery changed everything," says Professor Lawrence Krauss, a theoretical physicist at Case Western Reserve University in Ohio. 
"It produced a revolution in what we know about the universe. We know it is expanding, we know it is flat ... and we can measure that to an incredible accuracy," Krauss says. "Cosmology now is a precision science." 
Until then, theoretical physicists had cobbled together small pieces of evidence that the universe and everything in it had appeared suddenly about 14 billion years ago from an infinitesimally small point in a vacuum of nothingness.
"There was very strong theoretical prejudice against the Big Bang," Mather says. "The Big Bang was in opposition to the steady state theory." 
But after the discovery "the adherents of the steady state theory had to give up", he says. 
Professor Michael Turner, an astronomer and astrophysicist at the University of Chicago says, "It cemented what we call the hot Big Bang model ... It opened the door to this golden age of cosmology that we are now in."
The findings fit the theoretical models so perfectly that they impressed even astronomers when they saw the first data in 1992, says NASA's Dr Mary Cleave.
"He actually got a standing ovation when he announced his results," she says. 
Scientists have since followed up on those measurements to try to understand, for instance, dark matter.
This is mass that no one has been able to see or measure but which must exist because of the amount of gravity measured in the universe.
