
Antarctic octopuses, seen here, gave rise to deep sea relatives
Colder Antarctic waters drove the evolution of deep sea octopuses, suggests new research.
Australian researcher Dr Jan Strugnell of Queen's University Belfast and the British Antarctic Survey says the formation of ocean currents around the continent millions of years ago provided the right conditions for ocean creatures to evolve.
She presented her research on octopus evolution last week at the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research meeting in Hobart.
Previous research suggests a range of deep sea creatures had their origins in Antarctica, says Strugnell.
"People have thought for lots of different taxa that maybe this has happened, but no-one's really investigated it properly."
Strugnell decided to test the theory by studying the evolution of Antarctic and deep sea octopuses.
She constructed a family tree by comparing the octopus DNA and morphological features, including number of suckers.
Using fossils to calibrate evolutionary dates, Strugnell says Antarctic octopuses and their relatives evolved around 48 million years ago. 
And her findings so far suggest deep sea octopuses evolved from Antarctic octopuses some time after 34 million years ago. 
Strugnell has supported her findings using evidence from a completely different source.
Continental confirmation
At various stages in Earth's history, for example 100 and 60 million years ago, global climate change depleted oxygen in the deep sea and all the animals there went extinct.
Strugnell says the evolution of octopuses in the deep sea would only have been possible once those waters became oxygenated again and Antarctic octopuses were able to colonise them.
Evidence for the timing of this comes from the movement of the continents, says Strugnell.
About 34 million years ago, Antarctica separated completely from South America, with the opening up of Drakes Passage.
This allowed the Antarctic Circumpolar Current to form, which insulated the continent and allowed it to get really cold.
As cold water is more oxygen rich than warm water, oxygen from Antarctic waters would have been able to then diffuse into the deep seas along with Antarctic octopuses, which then evolved into deep sea octopuses.
"The opening of the Drakes Passage fits in with evolution of the group," says Strugnell.
She says it's early days but she is confident about her findings.
"This is still a work in progress but the evidence is looking good, halfway through my post doc."
Parts of her research have been published in the journals Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution and Cladistics.
