
Bushfire smoke hangs over Sydney 
Climate change could lead to a 20% increase in the area burned by bushfire in Sydney by the middle of this century, Australian research shows.
This does not necessarily mean new land will be affected. The increase may instead be due to some areas being burnt more frequently.
Fire ecologist, Professor Ross Bradstock, of the University of Wollongong will report his findings at the  Australasian Bushfire Conference 2006 in Brisbane next week.
Sydney's changing fire regime is important to understand because it's Australia's most populated city, says Bradstock, which itself increases a city's risk of bushfires.
Sydney is also ringed by fire-prone vegetation, and has a fire-friendly climate and layout. For instance, a lot of the city is in the path of fire-bearing winds.
"It's the biggest fire game in the country," says Bradstock.
In the past 20 years, around a million hectares of Sydney's have been burned by bushfire, including areas in the Greater Blue Mountains World Heritage Area.
And research published earlier this year suggests Sydney's fire risk is getting worse, says Bradstock.
Researchers at CSIRO and the Bureau of Meteorology analysed climate change models and predicted by 2050 there would be a 5-12% increase in the number of days with a high, very high or extreme fire danger. 
"That means an increase in the chance of having conditions which are conducive to major fires," says Bradstock.
Major fires, those that burn 1000 hectares or more, are only a minor proportion of the total number of fires but account for 95% of the area burned, he says.
Shift in fire weather
Bradstock wanted to find out how this shift in fire weather would translate in terms of the actual increase in number of fires and the area burnt.
To do this, he developed a model that combined the CSIRO and meteorology bureau predictions with historical records of fires from the Blue Mountains area to the west and the Central Coast area to the north of Sydney.
The models show the relationship between worsening fire weather and number of major fires is not linear.
Bradstock says the models show that while a 5% increase in high-risk days would result in a 2-6% increase in the area burned, a 12% increase in high-risk days would result in a 15-20% increase in area burned.
Over the 20 years between 2050 and 2070, he says this would equate to up to 150,000 more hectares than was burned over the past 20 years.
Bradstock says the Central Coast area is most vulnerable because it has a hotter and drier environment and a greater density of people living close to bushland.
This is the first time such an approach has been used in Australia and can be transferred to other locations, says Bradstock.
He developed the model in his previous job at the New South Wales Department of Environment and Conservation.
