
New research suggests that a fall in methane emissions, partly attributed to diminishing wetlands, was only temporary
China's booming economy and the wetlands of the northern hemisphere have emerged as key factors in what could be a future escalation in emissions of the greenhouse gas methane, according to new research.
A study of methane emissions published in the journal Nature today reports that atmospheric methane has increased over the past seven years after dropping during the 1990s.
The paper says China's growing economy, including its flourishing coal industry, may be behind an increase in methane emissions from human activity.
But this has been offset by a drop in natural emissions from swamps, bogs and wetlands, which are drying out as a result of prolonged drought.
"If the drying trend is reversed and emissions from wetlands return to normal, atmospheric methane levels may increase again, worsening the problem of climate change," says one of the report's authors, Australian researcher Dr Paul Steele.
Steele, a senior research scientist at CSIRO Marine and Atmospheric Research, says the paper isn't making any firm predictions.
"But we are pointing to the prospect [that emissions will increase]" he says.
The methane menace
Steele says methane is the second most important greenhouse gas after carbon dioxide.
Some 6 million tonnes of methane are emitted into the air each year, although the atmosphere can rid itself of some of this through chemical processes, including the oxidative effects of hydroxyl radicals.
Methane can be emitted as a result of natural or human activity. The primary natural source of methane is rotting wetland vegetation and belching by sheep and cattle.
It's also produced by decaying landfill and exploitation of fossil fuels, including drilling for oil and coal mining.
Captured and marketed, methane can be turned into an alternative energy source, but poorly managed it escapes into the atmosphere where it can contribute to global warming.
It's estimated to have been responsible for a fifth of the enhanced greenhouse effect over the past 200 years, Steele says.
He says it's unclear how much atmospheric methane comes from natural sources and how much from human activity.
"We might know the total fairly well but we don't have a very good handle on how to partition the total amongst the range of sources," he says.
But in an accompanying editorial Dr Jos Lelieveld, director of the Max Planck Institute for Chemistry in Germany, says about two-thirds of global methane currently comes from human activity.
He says atmospheric methane grew at a rate of more than 10% per decade before 1980 but dropped to almost zero by the 1990s.
Coal mines and wetlands
Steele says one of the effects of prolonged drought has been a drying up of wetlands, particularly in the northern hemisphere.
"Bogs and swamps emit methane because they've got all this rotting decaying vegetation at the base of the water," he says.
"If they dry up, then the emission of methane stops or slows down." 
The economic growth and coal mining activity of Asian countries like China, largely driven by the hunger for electricity, appears to be making up for any deficit.
"Coal mining can release methane to the atmosphere without safeguards," Steele says.
"We don't know if they're being applied [in China's mines] and to which effect."
