
More than half of the authors of the DSM, the manual used to diagnose mental health problems, have had ties with the pharmaceutical industry. But not everyone agrees this is a bad thing
Most of the experts who wrote the manual widely used to diagnose mental illness have had financial ties to drug makers such as research funding or stock holdings, US researchers report.
They call for full disclosure of the relationships between companies and the medical experts on panels that craft future editions of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, known as the DSM. 
"Transparency is especially important when there are multiple and continuous financial relationships between panel members and the pharmaceutical industry, because of the greater likelihood that the drug industry may be exerting an undue influence," the researchers write in a study to be published in the journal Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics.
The American Psychiatric Association, which publishes the DSM, says it will require financial disclosures for the next version, due out in 2011.
The study found 56% of 170 psychiatric experts who worked on the most recent edition, published in 1994, had at least one financial link to a drug maker at some point from 1989 through 2004. 
The relationships included speaking or consulting fees, ownership of company stock, payment for gifts and travel and funding for research. 
All the experts who developed sections defining mood disorders, schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders had such links, the study says. 
"The connections are especially strong in those diagnostic areas where drugs are the first line of treatment for mental disorders," the study says. 
Critics say psychiatric drugs are overprescribed. 
Drug company links fruitful, say some
Dr Darrel Regier, director of the American Psychiatric Association's research division, says the study is "an attempt to develop probably some guilt by association with the pharmaceutical industry". 
He says he does not believe financial connections to companies influenced development of the manual.
If none of the experts were involved with the industry, "that would mean they were really out of step with the major advances in the treatment of mental illness", he says. 
The authors of the new study, researchers from the University of Massachusetts and Tufts University, say they based their findings on searches of various databases, financial disclosures in medical journals and other records. 
They say they could not determine if the experts had ties to the companies while they were working on the manual.
After the update
But Dr Lisa Cosgrove, one of the study's authors, says the associations could raise questions even if they occurred after the experts update the DSM. 
"They can certainly leverage their participation on the DSM, which is very prestigious, into lucrative consulting contracts," says Cosgrove, a clinical psychologist at the University of Massachusetts in Boston. 
A spokesperson for the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America, says the industry group has not yet reviewed the study.
"But it is important to note that the physicians and other health care professionals who sit on expert medical advisory panels have impeccable integrity and base their decisions on independent judgments and research," he says.
