
Could Epstein-Barr virus be transmitted via sex as well as kissing?
Sex may increase the odds of contracting the glandular fever virus, a UK study suggests.
This means that doctors and patients may have to rethink what they currently call the 'kissing disease'.
The findings would also have implications for the vaccines now being tested against Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), which causes the disease.
The study into this common condition in young people, also known as mononucleosis, is published in the journal Clinical Infectious Diseases.
Of 510 college students who were initially free of EBV, nearly half became infected with the virus over the next three years, with sexually active students being at greater risk.
Students who said they'd had intercourse during the study were more likely to become infected than those who reported no romantic relationships, as well as those whose relationships were limited to kissing and petting. 
The findings suggest that sexual intercourse itself makes EBV transmission more likely, according to the study authors, led by Dr Dorothy Crawford of the University of Edinburgh.
Most adults worldwide are infected with EBV, which, after first infecting a person, remains dormant in the body for life.
Most of the time, the initial infection causes no apparent symptoms, especially when it's contracted in childhood.
But in developed countries infection often doesn't occur until adolescence or young adulthood, when it's more likely to make people sick.
Glandular fever is marked by often prolonged fever, fatigue, sore throat and swollen lymph nodes.
According to Crawford's team, the new findings suggest that sexually active teens and adults may be exposed to a larger dose of EBV through particularly 'deep' kissing, or possibly through genital fluids, which can carry the virus. 
If a large viral load increases the odds of developing glandular fever, the researchers note, then an EBV vaccine may be successful even if it merely decreases the amount of EBV in the body rather than providing complete immunity. 
"We suggest that a vaccine that reduces the level of viral infection and/or replication during primary infection could be sufficient to prevent [glandular fever]," the researchers conclude.
