
Melting ice is depriving polar bears of their habitat, says a new report, making them a vulnerable species
Polar bears and hippos have joined the ranks of species threatened with extinction from climate change, unregulated hunting and other human-made dangers, says a leading environmental agency. 
The World Conservation Union, or IUCN, says more than 16,000 species of animals and plants are at risk of disappearing, including one in four mammals and one in eight birds. 
It added 530 species to its 'Red List' of endangered species since the last version released two years ago. 
Australia, China, Brazil and Mexico are home to large numbers of threatened species, says the IUCN.
Its members include 81 governments, more than 850 non-governmental groups and some 10,000 scientists from around the world.
The agency says countries worldwide need to boost efforts to preserve biodiversity through reduced emissions, tighter fishing and hunting controls and other measures. 
Without a reversal of global warming trends, it predicts polar bear populations would drop more than 30% in the next 45 years as melted ice caps deprive the animals of their habitat. 
It classifies the polar bear as a 'vulnerable' species, one step down from 'endangered' in its ranking of extinction risk. The polar bear was previously called a less-severe 'conservation dependent' species. 
The common hippo was also ranked as vulnerable, "primarily because of a catastrophic decline in the Democratic Republic of Congo", the IUCN says. 
Unrestricted hunting has caused a 95% decline in the central African country's hippo population since 1994, it says. The animal has never before been listed as threatened.
Critically endangered
Dama gazelles, once the most populous species of gazelle in the Sahara desert, are now 'critically endangered' as a result of poaching, the report finds.
More than half of the Mediterranean's 25 endemic species of freshwater fish are deemed to be at risk of extinction, along with one in four of East Africa's freshwater fish. 
In Malawi, where freshwater fish account for 70% of the animal protein that humans eat, the numbers of lake trout in Lake Malawi have halved in the past decade. 
"This could have major commercial and dietary consequences for the region," the IUCN says. 
Ocean life is also cited as vulnerable. Of 547 species of sharks and rays assessed in the report, 20% are found to be at risk of extinction. Bottom-dwelling species also logged huge declines as fisheries have reached into ever-deeper waters. 
"Populations are destined to decline in the absence of international catch limits," the report says, adding regulations on mesh size and non-fishing areas could help restore stocks. 
Conservation can work
World Conservation Union director general Achim Steiner says resurgent populations of white-tailed eagles in Europe shows that protective measures can protect vulnerable species.
"Conservation measures are making a difference," Steiner says.
For example, on Australia's Christmas Island, the seabird Abbott's booby was declining due to habitat clearance and was listed as 'critically endangered' in 2004.
But the booby is recovering thanks to conservation measures and has now moved down a category to 'endangered', the IUCN says.
