
Learning a musical instrument can change the way we remember
Musicians use unique mental processes when it comes to recognising a tune but this trait is learnt rather than inherent, a researcher says.
PhD student David Brennan from the University of Western Sydney has shown that people with musical training appear to have different memory pathways compared to others.
He will present his findings at a symposium on memory and the performing arts at the International Conference on Memory in Sydney in July.
Brennan tested the ability of 72 people, including musicians and non-musicians, to recognise musical themes from popular TV shows, such as Friends, Law and Order and M*A*S*H.
They were required to differentiate between the original theme and a transposed version where pitch, tempo, or both pitch and tempo had been changed.
Differences between musicians and non-musicians
Brennan found both musicians and non-musicians could identify the original theme when it was compared with a version where just the pitch or tempo was changed.
But musicians did much better at identifying the original theme compared to a version where both pitch and tempo had been changed proportionally, or had been moved up and down by exactly the same degree.
This suggests that non-musicians remember music as an integrated piece of information. But musicians compartmentalise elements of the music and store them as discreet blocks, Brennan says.
"I found that non-musicians ... store the sound as a more of a composite picture, they take the entire piece of information and store it relationally between all the different aspects," he says.
"Musicians store it as individual parameters ... for example, tempo, key and timbre."
He says storing relational information is more efficient than storing it as separate elements but the compartmentalised approach is more accurate.
This reflects the fact that remembering musical sequences has a lower priority for non-musicians than for those who make music their craft.
Are musicians born or made?
Brennan says the research suggests that learning a musical instrument can change your mental pathways.
"It suggests that over time musicians' training leads them down particular paths of how to store information," he says.
"I don't think it indicates any pre-wiring of brains but it certainly suggests that over a period of many years of training they allocate their perceptual resources a little differently than other people."
The research also sheds more light on the mechanisms that govern how we remember things, Brennan says.
"This probably represents the fact that ... as you allocate more time and training to dealing with the fine details of information you tend to store it in more separate categories.
"Conversely, it suggests that for the many things we have to deal with that aren't focal points, we have a very elegantly efficient way of joining them into one single relationship construct."
