
RNA polymerase, a crucial molecule in the multi-step process that encodes genetic material into proteins. Roger Kornberg published its structure in 2001
US scientist Professor Roger Kornberg, the son of a Nobel laureate, has won the 2006 Nobel chemistry prize for showing how genetic information stored in genes is copied and then transferred to parts of the cell that produce proteins.
This process, known as transcription, is essential to how cells develop and life itself.
Kornberg's prize came 47 years after he watched his father Arthur accept the medicine Nobel in Stockholm for his own gene work.
The Swedish Academy of Sciences says Kornberg junior's research into how RNA or ribonucleic acid moves genetic information around the cell was of "fundamental medical importance".
"[It] is a key mechanism to the biological machinery. If it does not work, we die," says Professor Per Ahlberg, a member of the Nobel Committee for Chemistry at the Academy. 
Dr Elias Zerhouni, director of the US National Institutes of Health, which has helped fund both Kornbergs' work, says understanding the process may help fight disease.
"Illnesses like cancer, heart disease, and various other kinds of inflammation are linked to disturbances in the transcription process," he says. 
"Understanding this process in more detail may provide researchers with the needed tools to develop new treatments for diseases." 
And because the transfer of information helps explain how a cell becomes a nerve or liver or muscle cell, understanding transcription is crucial for the development of various therapeutic applications of stem cells. 
X-ray crystallography
If DNA is the blueprint for life, RNA is the builder that has to make something out of it, and Kornberg figured out how this happens.
He used a process called x-ray crystallography, in which molecules in a chemical reaction are 'frozen' into crystals and photographed using x-rays, to capture transcription in action and in incredible detail.
These images showed the complex structure of RNA.
But work was slow, says Kornberg, who is now at Stanford University School of Medicine.
"It was only possible because of advances in computing."
Kornberg made an image of a molecule that RNA uses to read and transcribe the DNA code. 
It took close to 20 years to find a way to first see and then understand the molecule, known as RNA polymerase. 
"[The process of transcription] is one of the most fundamental biological processes," says Dr Jeremy Berg, director of the National Institute of General Medical Sciences, which helped fund Kornberg's work. 
"The DNA double helix is a very beautiful structure but it is a challenge to deal with because all the information is inside," Berg says.
"What RNA polymerase has to do is somehow find the right spot and then pull the two strands of the double helix apart in the right region. 
"It has to copy the sequence very accurately. It has to stop and start in the right places. It has to turn on the right genes under the right circumstances," Berg adds.
Kornberg senior was honoured for advancing understanding on how genetic information is transferred from a mother cell to its daughters.
The award makes the Kornbergs the sixth father-son pair to win Nobels since the prizes were first awarded in 1901 and the eighth set of parent and child laureates.
