
The double vortex at Venus' south pole
Venus has a bizarre double vortex that whirls in the atmosphere above its south pole, a new mission to the planet has found.
The unmanned Venus Express spacecraft spotted the "double eye", formed by winds of super-hurricane force, in its very first swing around Venus, says the European Space Agency (ESA).
The Venus Express pictures also show the presence of a collar of cold air around the vortex structure, possibly due to the recycling of cold air downwards.
Previous missions to Venus have spotted a similar structure over the planet's north pole and glimpsed at stormy atmospheric behaviour at the south pole. 
The winds on Venus spin westwards at hundreds of kilometres per hour, taking only four days to complete the rotation of a planet that is just under the size of Earth. 
This "super-rotation," combined with the natural recycling of hot air in the atmosphere, would logically induce a vortex over each pole, but the mystery is why there should be two vortices. 
"We still know very little about the mechanisms by which the super-rotation and the polar vortexes are linked," says Dr H&aring;kan Svedhem, the mission's project scientist. 
"Also, we are still not able to explain why the global atmospheric circulation of the planet results in a double vortex and not a single vortex," he says.
"Atmospheric vortextes are very complex structures that are very difficult to model, even on Earth."
Venus Express is Europe's first dedicated mission to Earth's closest planet. 
It went into elongated orbit around Venus on 11 April, equipped with scanners aimed at deciphering the enigmatic Venusian atmosphere. 
The elongated orbit, lasted 9 days and ranged between 350,000 and 400 kilometres from Venus' surface
Since 7 May Venus Express has been circling the planet in its final 24-hour orbit, ranging between 66,000 and 250 kilometres from Venus.
The planet seems to have a case of runaway global warming, and understanding the mechanisms that drive this could be of use in dealing with climate change on Earth.
Venus's mean surface temperature is 457&ordm;C - hot enough to melt lead and even hotter than Mercury, the closest planet to the Sun. 
Its atmosphere is 96% carbon dioxide, with yellowish clouds of sulfur and sulfuric acid droplets.
