
Coral reefs have changed dramatically since the arrival of humans, particularly in the last few decades
Coral reefs have suffered more damage since the 1970s than any time in the last 220,000 years, according to a study that warns of the threats of overfishing and coastal development.
Scientists from Australia have found that coral reefs in the Caribbean island of Barbados were relatively unchanged for about 100,000 years before the arrival of humans, despite rising and falling sea levels. 
But according to the paper published in Ecology Letters, modern day reefs now look startlingly different and are dominated by algae and seaweed. 
Associate Professor John Pandolfi, of the Australian Research Council's Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies, says human activity has made reefs far more susceptible to change. 
"When you compare that typical coral community in the geological past to the coral community that we see today in Barbados it's fundamentally different," says Pandolfi, who led the study. 
"It's clear that these modern coral reefs have been significantly altered and the only thing that's different is that humans are around. 
"We see that the impact of overfishing and coastal development has had a huge effect the likes of which we haven't seen for hundreds of thousands of years."
Overfishing takes its toll
Pandolfi studied the preserved remains of entire coral reef communities that lived in the Caribbean up to 220,000 years ago.
He analysed four periods in the reef's history, when geological activity pushed it to the surface and wiped out the coral community.
Each time, the sea floor was recolonised and the coral reef returned in a very similar structure with the same species.
"When we look at large scale perturbations in the fossil record, [such as] global climate change and sea level changes, when the reefs come back .... they appear to assemble in similar ways," he says.
"So through out the last couple of 100,000 years we've had coral reefs in the island of Barbados that are very much alike through time."
