
Common brown snakes like this one surprised the scientists by producing higher levels of venom than anyone had seen before
Australian snakes are delivering more venom than we realise, according to researchers who say this may force us to rethink how we treat snakebites. 
The poisonous Australian brown snake is one of the surprise packages, producing what lead researcher Peter Mirtschin describes as "spectacular" yields of venom. 
Mirtschin, managing director of the company Venom Supplies and adjunct research fellow at the University of South Australia, and colleagues publish their findings online in the journal Ecotoxicology.
Dr Bryan Grieg Fry, of the Australian Venom Research Unit at the University of Melbourne, says the study is "of huge importance", particularly in relation to brown snakes and current antivenom guidelines.
"The findings have huge clinical implications. The brown snake is the most common cause of snakebite in Australia and the most common cause of death by snakebite in Australia," says Fry, who wasn't involved in the research.
"The key to antivenom is to get it in early and to get in the proper amounts. A big amount [given] early means less overall total, as well as a better clinical outcome."
"[These findings] can dramatically influence the amount of antivenom needed."
He says the findings are "definitely" strong enough to change clinical practice in Australia.
Milking snakes
The researchers milked 33 dangerous species of snakes native and non-native to Australia numerous times over a six-year period from 1999 to 2005. 
Then they averaged the yield, or the average amount of venom a snake produces when it is milked, by each snake type.
The team found that snakes from the Pseudonaja genus, including the Queensland and South Australian common brown snake, yielded higher than previously published amounts of venom.
"In certain individuals we found quite spectacular yields. If you had a bite by one of those you'd be in real trouble," says Mirtschin.
Higher percentage solids were also obtained from venoms from four cobra species from the Naja genus and the Pseudechis (king brown) genus.
Snake venom comprises salts, water, enzymes, proteins and other macromolecular and smaller organic and inorganic compounds.
Venom yield is traditionally measured and compared in its dried powder form, where the water is removed, leaving the remaining solids.
The findings have led researchers to call for a rethink on current volumes and dosages of antivenom serums. 
"If you are giving antivenom then maybe the vial size of the antivenom should be increased. Or at least the number of vials that are recommended as the initial dose [be increased]," Mirtschin says.
