
The researchers compared the DNA from different types of banksia and other woody plants around the world
Tropical plants evolve twice as quickly as their cousins from more temperate regions, researchers say. 
That could provide the answer to one of the most puzzling questions about evolution - why there are so many more species in tropical regions than there are in temperate zones.
A New Zealand study, published online today in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, measured the rate of change that had occurred over millions of years in the DNA of 45 closely paired species of woody plants.
"For each pair we used two closely related species, one from the tropics and one from a temperate zone," says co-author Dr Len Gillman from Auckland University of Technology. 
The study compared plants included conifers, kauri pine, grevilleas and wattle from tropical areas of Australia, Papua New Guinea and the Amazon with their counterparts in temperate zones in countries including New Zealand, the US and Australia's island state of Tasmania.
By sequencing a particular region of DNA in each pair and comparing it to the same region in an equivalent common ancestor, the team were able to measure the rate of evolutionary change.
"We found that there was double the molecular change in the tropical species," says Gillman.
"If you've got twice the rate of evolution occurring you've got twice the opportunity for species to be generated and accumulate over time."
The study suggests that the faster rate of evolutionary change in tropical plants is due to higher metabolic and productivity rates. A higher metabolic rate leads to more cell division and increases the opportunities for mutation. 
Although it was suspected that more energy was responsible for the greater species diversity towards the equator, the New Zealand team is the first to demonstrate a mechanism - a faster rate of evolution.  
The researchers say that this is unlikely to be caused by rapid genetic drift in the generally smaller populations of plants in the species-rich tropics, though it warrants further investigation.
They suggest that the greater rate of speciation seen in the tropics is a consequence rather than a cause of the faster rate of molecular evolution.
