
We may soon be getting weather reports from Mars without sending probes into space. And scientists say an old way of gathering data may do the trick
Astronomers have shown that an old technique for mapping the topography of Mars from Earth could be used in a novel way to map the Red Planet's weather. 
The thin atmosphere on Mars consists almost entirely of carbon dioxide.
And before spacecraft images revealed the planet's surface features, astronomers tried to use variations in the density of carbon dioxide to map the topography, with mixed results.
Now preliminary ground-based images of Mars taken in the near infrared region of the spectrum, which is most sensitive to carbon dioxide, have revealed interesting surface features.
These show remarkable agreement with the accurate topographical data obtained from the Mars Orbiting Laser Altimeter aboard the Mars Global Surveyor. 
The density of carbon dioxide also indicates the atmospheric pressure at the surface, which is subject to huge seasonal variation as carbon dioxide readily transports from one pole to another.
So PhD candidate Sarah Chamberlain from the Australian Centre for Astrobiology at Macquarie University says the technique could be now be used for remotely sensing changes in atmospheric pressure in the Red Planet's dynamic weather system.  
"Since we now have an accurate topographic map of the Martian surface, we can use the technique to look for variations from the topography to indicate regions of high and low pressure," she says.  
This will provide a pressure map that will help with understanding weather patterns through seasonal changes across the planet.  
"Weather is important to understand on Mars for landing spacecraft and looking at the atmospheric dynamics on other planets," says Chamberlain. 
Measurements of the surface pressure distribution on Mars provide the key data needed for testing general circulation models of the Martian atmosphere.
The only pressure measurements that have been made so far are from the Viking landers in 1976 and later the Pathfinder Rover, which cannot give a global picture of the Martian atmosphere.
Chamberlain is co-author of a paper in the latest Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia, which suggests that until a network of surface stations can be established on Mars, remote-sensing techniques such as the one demonstrated will provide the only way of obtaining such data.
