
'Fred the Thread', a caterpillar that lives in the stem of a New Zealand wetland plant
'Fred the Thread' is vying for a place in the record books as the world's thinnest caterpillar, its discoverers say.
The New Zealand caterpillar is barely 0.9 millimetres wide and is the larval stage of an entirely new genus and species of moth Houdinia flexilissima.
But scientists at Landcare Research, who discovered Fred, are concerned about his survival.
This is because he lives in the cane rush Sporadanthus ferrugineus, a threatened wetland plant that forms peat.
The researchers publish details of Fred in the latest issue of the journal Invertebrate Systematics.
Invertebrate ecologist Dr Corinne Watts was researching the restoration of areas mined for peat at Torehape on New Zealand's North Island. And she was intrigued by star-shaped tunnels in the plant stems.
"It was obvious that something was making them. But every time I cut open a stem there was nothing inside," she says.
"At the time the caterpillars were so tiny that I kept missing them. It wasn't until they grew bigger that I finally saw a bright orange thread and thought 'gotcha'." 
Taxonomist Dr Robert Hoare used an electron microscope to measure the caterpillar which, although thin, grows to a respectable few centimetres long. 
"Sporadanthus stems are very narrow so to live inside them the caterpillar has to get longer rather than fatter," says Watts. 
Finding the tiny adult moths, only half a centimetre long, proved almost as difficult.
That was until, using a technique borne of frustration, the scientists learnt that kicking the plants elicited a cloud of them. 
The moths are active at dusk and survive for a brief breeding period of four to six weeks between October and November.
Although the entire life cycle is not yet fully understood, it is clear that over two or three years the caterpillar goes through the usual stages of moulting, pupating and metamorphosing into a most unusual moth, all within the confines of a 5 millimetre wide stem.
Such a feat, as well as the remarkable way the species has managed to elude detection for so long, prompted the new genus to be named after the renowned escapologist Harry Houdini. 
Fred the Thread's host plant is found in one of three remaining peat bogs on the North Island, the researchers say.
Over the years, drainage and conversion of peat bogs to pasture has resulted in habitat loss, leading for calls to put the plant on the endangered list and to reappraise the conservation status of the moth.
