
Flares from the Sun are random events but are usually only big at high points in the cycle of solar activity, when this image was taken
Communication systems are being disrupted by the effects of an unusually large solar explosion that started lashing the Earth this week.
The explosion could also cause spectacular auroras in the night skies as far north as Sydney, weather permitting.
Dr David Cole, director of the Australian Government's space weather service, says the massive solar explosion as the Sun is supposed to be in a fairly quiet phase.
"We didn't expect anything in particular and suddenly this turns up and it's really fierce," says Cole, of IPS Radio and Space Services in Sydney.
When magnetic fields in the Sun coalesce in dark regions called sunspots they can explode sending a blast of radiation. Such solar flares reach Earth within minutes.
This is followed by a cloud of plasma or coronal mass ejection (CME) that takes a day or so to reach Earth.
The flare and CME alter the ionosphere, the outermost part of Earth's atmosphere, and cause problems with communication systems.
Unpredictable
Although solar explosions are random, they are more likely to happen when the Sun is most active, during what is called a solar maximum that happens every 11 years. But there is currently a solar minimum.
Cole says solar flares are hard to predict because there are no models of how they work.
While Coles' agency suspected something might happen when they saw a sunspot pointing directly at the Earth and a build up in magnetic fields, they couldn't tell exactly if or when an explosion would occur.
"It's like someone snapping their fingers, you don't know when they're going to do it," he says.
GPS and short-wave communications blocked
Cole says the solar flare that reached the Earth mid-week, had possibly the strongest emission at 1.4 gigahertz ever seen, matching almost exactly the wavelength GPS satellites use. 
He says communication with GPS navigation satellites in the lower ionosphere was blacked out for up to two hours.
Short-wave radio communications, used by defence forces, aviation and emergency services, were also affected, says Cole. Such communications pass through or bounce off the ionosphere. 
But Cole stresses air traffic control does not rely on short-wave communication.
Fire fighters affected?
Another CME reached Earth today and Cole predicts its effects on short-wave communications will last throughout the weekend.
It might also affect short-wave communication of some personnel currently fighting Australia's severe bushfires.
He says his agency will let such emergency services know which frequencies will be unaffected by the CME so they can use these instead.
Cole says electricity grids close to the poles could also be disrupted today by the CME.
Cole says the same sunspot produced caused less serious explosions earlier this month and may cause another in around two weeks time.
Spacewalkers take cover
While humans on Earth are protected from the effects of solar explosions, those in space are vulnerable, says Cole.
For instance this week astronauts on the shuttle Discovery and the International Space Station have been sleeping in protected areas and may need to cut planned spacewalks short if radiation levels get too high.
