
Fiddler crabs with blue shells are vulnerable. So when hungry birds are around, they turn muddy brown
Tiny blue-shelled fiddler crabs change their colour to avoid being eaten by predatory birds, researchers have discovered.
Scientists have long been intrigued by the crabs' ability to change the colour of their top shell from bright blue to a more subdued, muddy shade.
But exactly why the crabs change their colour hasn't been clear.
"When you catch them, for instance, they go dull," says Dr Jochen Zeil from the Australian National University, whose research appears in the Journal of Experimental Biology.
To find an answer, Zeil and his colleagues studied a particular species of fiddler crab, Uca vomeris, on the mud flats of Australia's northeast coast, south of Townsville.
"Some populations of these crabs are all very dull, but in other places they are very colourful," Zeil says. "We wanted to understand how this happens."
The scientists looked at variations between crabs from three different areas: one group was dull coloured, another was colourful and a third group mixed.
They found differences in the numbers of crab-eating birds near the dull coloured populations.
"In the places where the crabs were colourful, there were few birds," Zeil says. "But in the others there were more birds actively hunting crabs."
To confirm these findings, the scientists set up an experimental model to test whether the crabs changed their shell colour in direct response to the threat of being eaten.
They found two very colourful crabs living close together and set up a kind of wooden screen between them.
One crab was left to go about its life as normal. But the other was subjected every couple of minutes to the attentions of a pretend bird. In reality, it was a small foam ball suspended on fishing wire.
Crabs have poor vision, so the approach of the black ball was enough to convince it a bird was coming, Zeil says.
Within days, that crab had changed its colour to the muddy shade, while the other remained colourful.
"We could observe that over a couple of days, the crabs did change their colour when they are confronted with this dummy bird," the researcher says.
Scientists suspect the blue colour of the crabs is normally used to help them identify others living close by, and avoid fights, Zeil says.
The next step in his research will be to see whether staying dull all the time has any effect on neighbourly relations.
