
Saturn's moon Enceladus might have rolled or rotated itself to place an area of low density at the south pole. This illustrates the moon's interior, with warm, low-density material rising to the surface (yellow) from within or from its rocky core (red)
Millions of years ago, Saturn's moon Enceladus may have somersaulted in space, creating an ice-spewing hot spot on the moon's south pole, scientists suggest.
For now, it is the only explanation why the small satellite sports a very active, though isolated, polar region.
Dr Francis Nimmo, an assistant professor at the University of California at Santa Cruz, and team publish their research today in the journal Nature.
During flybys of Enceladus, the Saturn-orbiting Cassini probe has snapped pictures of gigantic icy plumes, indicating active geysers at the moon's south pole.
Researchers who have been studying images and other data collected by the Cassini spacecraft believe a relatively warm blob of ice rose from beneath the moon's frozen surface.
It could also have emerged from within its frigid and rocky core.
Less dense than the surrounding terrain, the blob would be more susceptible to Saturn's powerful gravitational tug on Enceladus, a grip that at one time seems to have caused the moon to roll over, says Nimmo.
The team calculated the effects of a low-density blob beneath the surface of Enceladus and showed it could cause the moon to roll over by up to 30&deg; and put the blob at the pole.
It may not have been a solitary incident either, Nimmo says.
"It could be like a lava lamp and each time a blob is reproduced, it causes the moon to flip," he says.
The manoeuver may not be all that uncommon. Studies of magnetically charged particles around Earth show evidence that the planet's north pole may at one time have resided elsewhere, Nimmo adds.
Likewise, Uranus's moon Miranda shows evidence of multiple flips, he says.
The researchers plan follow-up studies to look for more evidence. 
First, they want to carefully examine surface images for craters. The moon should be more heavily cratered in the areas that face its direction of travel.
If Enceladus flipped, it's current face should show fewer impacts than its trailing regions, which at one time may have been facing forward.
The pull of gravity
The team also would like to fly Cassini low over Enceladus' southern pole to see if its gravitational pull is slightly weaker than at other parts of the moon. 
Cassini would become the test object while radio antennas on Earth track its movement during the flyby.
A minute change in Cassini's speed, perhaps as small as a centimetre per second, would be an indication of a lower-mass region at the pole.
"It's a difficult measurement to make, but we'd like to try," Nimmo says.
Scientists are not sure what mechanism fuels Enceladus' hot spot, but they believe it is tied to tidal forces from Saturn and possibly a sister moon, Janus.
"You have this tiny moon blasting out a huge amount of heat," Nimmo says. "Presumably it has to get squeezed. Something is causing all this pushing and pulling.
"It's astounding that Cassini found a region of current geological activity on an icy moon that we would expect to be frigidly cold, especially down at this moon's equivalent of Antarctica," adds co-author Dr Robert Pappalardo, a planetary scientist and assistant professor at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
