
Choosing the racy red shoes over the sensible loafers relates to how your brain assigns values to items or goods
Can't choose between the racy red shoes and the sensible loafers? 
Scientists say this indecisiveness relates to how your brain cells assign values to different items.
Researchers at Harvard Medical School in Boston have identified neurones that seem to play a role in how a person selects different items or goods.
Scientists have known that cells in different parts of the brain react to attributes such as colour, taste or quantity.
Now Dr Camillo Padaoa-Schioppa and Associate Professor John Assad describe in the journal Nature how neurones involved in assigning values help people to make choices.
"The neurones we have identified encode the value individuals assign to the available items when they make choices based on subjective preferences, a behaviour called economic choice," Padoa-Schioppa says. 
The scientists say this research is part of the emerging field of neuroeconomics.
The scientists located the neurones in an area of the brain known as the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) while studying macaque monkeys that had to choose between different flavours and quantities of juices. 
They correlated the animals' choices with the activity of neurones in the OFC with the valued assigned to the different types of juices. 
Some neurones would be highly active when the monkeys selected three drops of grape juice, for example, or 10 drops of apple juice. 
Other neurones encoded the value of only the orange juice or grape juice. 
"The monkey's choice may be based on the activity of these neurones," says Padoa-Schioppa. 
Earlier research involving the OFC showed that lesions in the area seem to have an association with eating disorders, compulsive gambling and unusual social behaviour. 
The new findings show an association between the activity of the OFC and the mental valuation process underlying choice behaviour, according to the scientists.
"A concrete possibility is that various choice deficits may result from an impaired or dysfunctional activity of this population [of neurones], though this hypothesis remains to be tested," says Padoa-Schioppa.
