
Massage may make baby happier, but the evidence to date suggests it won't improve physical or emotional development
A gentle massage appears to lower levels of stress hormones in unsettled babies, but there's no evidence that infant massage has any benefit on growth or development, a scientific analysis shows.
Infant massage has long been used in many Asian and African cultures to ease colic and crying, help babies sleep, and even aid their growth and development. 
There has also been growing interest in infant massage among parents in Western countries. 
UK researchers seeking to assess the science behind the practice analysed 23 clinical trials.
They report their findings in the latest issue of The Cochrane Library, a publication of the Cochrane Collaboration, an international organisation that evaluates medical research.
The trials involved infants aged six months and under who were randomly assigned to receive massage or not.
The researchers found that across nine of the studies, gentle massage appeared to improve infants' sleep patterns, ease crying, and strengthen mother-child bonding. 
Some studies found that massage reduced babies' levels of the stress hormones norepinephrine and epinephrine and appeared to release melatonin, which is associated with sleep patterns.
Given this apparent hormonal effect, it's "not surprising" that massage seemed to improve sleep and crying, according to the researchers, led by Dr Angela Underdown of the University of Warwick in Coventry, England. 
Tentative support
But the nine studies failed to come up with any evidence of cognitive or behavioural benefits.
"There is no evidence of any impact on infant attachment, temperament, psychomotor or mental development," the researchers say.
Overall, the results offer "tentative support" for teaching parents and caregivers infant massage, the investigators conclude.
But they say there isn't enough evidence to universally recommend the practice.
The trials included in the review were conducted in China, North America, Great Britain and Israel, and included 598 healthy, full-term infants. 
In some studies, researchers provided the massage, while parents did in others.
Most looked at the effects of daily massage over a period of weeks. 
The researchers said 14 of the 23 trials they looked at were not entirely reliable because of concerns about their methodology.
For example, some lacked information about how the study was designed and conducted, meaning more quality research is needed. 
It's also unclear how often, when or for how long babies should receive massage to get the most benefits. 
Underdown and colleagues recommend that future studies examine these questions.
