
A wide variety of food helps brushtail possums eat and eat, without overloading their bodies with toxins
Brushtail possums can tell when they've eaten too much of their favourite snacks, according to new research revealing their uncanny ability to regulate what goes into their mouths.
Unlike humans, who can pig out on chocolate or hot chips until we make ourselves sick, possums know exactly when they're starting to overload their system with toxins, says researcher Dr Karen Marsh of the Australian National University.
"They're really good at regulating their intake and knowing exactly how much they can eat," she says of the marsupial herbivores.
Marsh reports in a recent issue of the journal Ecology that the common brushtail possum (Trichosurus vulpecula) thrives when it eats a wide variety of foods, rather than a limited range.
The reasons for this have been unclear in the past.
But Marsh says her study supports one of the leading theories, which suggests that possums are better able to neutralise small amounts of naturally occurring toxins from a variety of foods than a high-toxin load from a single food.
Food toxins
Because of its plant-based diet, the brushtail possum eats foods that not only contain nutrients, but potentially toxic by-products.
It neutralises these in various ways, for example, by oxidising the toxins or converting them into different molecules. 
If the possum only eats one food it will reach the threshold for that particular toxin faster than if it selects from a wider smorgasbord.
"Basically they seem to be able to recognise whether toxins are similar or different and feed accordingly," Marsh says.
"What we think happens is that the toxins activate the emetic pathways in the body so the possums start to feel sick when their detox pathways get saturated."
Getting rid of toxins
Marsh tested the hypothesis by identifying various toxin thresholds in the possums and working out how each was eliminated by analysing metabolites in their urine. 
She then offered the possums a range of foods with similar toxin pathways and a range of foods with different pathways.
She found the possums ate less when the foods activated similar pathways.
Marsh says it's important to understand the mechanisms that regulate diet in possums because it can help in their conservation.
"We want to know what sort of habitat is going to be suitable for them," she says.
"Can they survive in a habitat that's been degraded and only has one type of plant, or do they really need that mix ... so they can be swapping between the different plants?"
She says humans should have the same responses to food toxins, but most toxic metabolites have been eliminated from our food, making us more prone to overeating.
