
A new sensor made of nanomaterials could give robots a sense of touch like we have with our fingers
A new type of sensor may one day give robots the power to "feel" surfaces and perform delicate operations in the same way that human hands do today, say US researchers.
Vivek Maheshwari and Professor Ravi Saraf, of the Department of Chemical Engineering at the University of Nebraska in Lincoln, report on the new device in today's issue of the journal Science.
They say their sensor could give a robot tactile sensitivity comparable to that of human fingers.
Robots equipped with such sensors could be used in minimally invasive surgery, where tiny incisions and tiny tools are used to target very specific areas in the body.
The new sensor is an electroluminescent film that glows in response to pressure and texture.
When an object is pressed into the film, the light from the film is captured by a specialised camera and translated into a picture. 
Sensor feels out a coin
To illustrate the power of their new sensor, Maheshwari and Saraf pressed coins against the device. 
A US penny produced an image detailed enough to show the wrinkles in the clothing of Abraham Lincoln, who is pictured on the coin, and the letters "TY" in "LIBERTY".
A robot's "hands" could be coated with the sensor film and the signals received could be used to guide the robot in performing surgery, say the researchers, in the same way that surgeons now use their sense of touch to find tumors or gallstones. 
"Moreover, there is great interest in developing humanoid robots that can sense shapes, textures, and hardness and manipulate complex objects, which are not readily possible by vision alone," say Maheshwari and Saraf.
Their new film is made of alternating layers of gold and semiconducting cadmium-sulfur nanoparticles separated by nonconducting, or dielectric, films. 
Nanoparticles are extremely tiny, a nanometer, or a billionth of a metre, or less in diameter. 
Dr Richard Crowder of the School of Electronics and Computer Science at the University of Southampton in the UK says the development of tactile sensors is one of the key technical challenges in advanced robotics and minimally invasive surgery.
"The unique sensor developed by Maheshwari and Saraf could prove to be a key advance in technology, for reasons including relatively simple construction, apparent robustness, and high resolution," he says in an accompanying editorial in Science.
