
Bacteria found in household sewage can generate their own electricity. Now scientists say they are one step closer to harnessing it
The waste water we flush down the loo could one day be used to generate electricity, scientists from Belgium say. 
The Ghent University researchers have designed a way to boost the output of microbial fuel cells, an emerging technology that captures the energy produced when bacteria break down waste and turn it into electrical current.
Investigators from around the world are researching the potential of microbial fuel cells, but prototypes so far have only produced tiny amounts of electricity. 
"At the moment we are still at the stage of basic research, but the potential for the technology is good," says Associate Professor Zhiguo Yuan, from the Advanced Wastewater Management Centre at Australia's University of Queensland. 
The latest paper, which appears in the journal Environmental Science and Technology, brings the concept closer to reality.
The researchers show that six small fuel cells stacked together can generate higher voltages and increased current.
"The efficiency of these systems is determined by the distances the electrons have to travel," says co-author Dr Korneel Rabaey.
"If you want to generate a lot of power from microbial fuel cells, you have to have a very thin reactor. But you also need to be able to work with a high volume of waste water." 
Putting several small cells together ticks both of those boxes, says Rabaey, who moved to the University of Queensland a month ago. "This work shows one step we need to make larger scale designs." 
But scientists aren't sure exactly which bugs generate the electricity in the fuel cells.
"There is a mixture of those that can live in that environment," says Yuan.
Treating water
Scientists are most interested in using microbe-generated electricity to power the water treatment process itself.
As well as producing current, the technology can also help clear bacteria out of the water. It might also clean out substances like sulfur and nitrogen.
Once scientists figure out how to build large-scale fuel cells, Rabaey says, the cells will probably be used first to treat industrial waste water.
The idea of using stuff we flush down the toilet to power our light bulbs is probably a more distant hope. But he says it is not out of the question.
"The amount of energy that is in waste is incredible," he says. "Just one sugar-cube, for example, has enough energy to power a laptop for 12 hours. And the stuff in our waste water is just different forms of sugar."
