
Sensitive tastebuds may explain why your kids won't eat broccoli, carrots or cucumbers
Picky kids who won't eat vegetables may be particularly sensitive to bitter flavours, a new study shows.
These preschoolers turn up their noses at not only bitter vegetables, like broccoli and olives, but sometimes also sweeter vegies like carrots and red peppers. 
The findings suggest that innately sensitive tastebuds help explain why some children are so staunchly opposed to vegetables, the study authors report in the latest issue of the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition.
In recent years, scientists have identified a gene, dubbed TAS2R38, that controls a receptor for bitter flavour. 
A study published last year found that children with certain variations of that gene are particularly sensitive tasters, able to detect a very small amount of a bitter-tasting compound in water. 
The 65 preschoolers in the current study were tested the same way.
A total of 37% said the water tasted "yucky" or bad, while the rest couldn't taste anything and were considered "nontasters". 
When the children were given free range to snack on bitter-tasting vegetables (broccoli, olives and cucumbers) and sweeter ones (carrots and red peppers), the sensitive kids ate significantly fewer bitter vegetables.
And while only 8% of nontaster children refused all of the vegetables, 32% of the sensitive tasters did so.
At the dinner table
So what should parents make of all this? According to the researchers, parents of fussy eaters should recognise that their children may not be having the same taste experience that they are. 
"Parents should try not to project their own food preferences onto their children," says study co-author Dr Beverly Tepper, a professor of food science at Rutgers University.
A nontaster parent who loves broccoli, for instance, may have a more bitter-sensitive child who simply doesn't enjoy the greens in the same way, she says. 
But that doesn't mean that bitter-sensitive kids are destined to shun vegetables their whole lives, a potential comfort to parents who regularly engage in mealtime struggles. 
"We do change our food preferences as we grow and learn," Tepper says, noting that the "impact of genetics isn't set in stone". 
Whether there's a more immediate fix to the bitter-sensitivity issue is unclear.
A tasty sauce might make vegetables more palatable to a sensitive child, but dousing veggies with toppings may not be the most nutritionally sound choice, Tepper says. 
Serving vegetables cooked rather than raw might help, she says, as cooking takes some of the bite out.
