
People who prefer old technology to new may form a new cultural group, just as they have done in history
An underclass of internet 'refuseniks' may be breeding and planning terrorist acts in coming years to protest against technology, according to a survey.
The poll by the Pew Internet and  American Life Project, an independent think tank, asked people what they thought of the effect of the internet on social, political and economic life in the year 2020.
A total of 742 technology thinkers and stakeholders took part in the online survey.
And a majority (58%) agreed with predictions that refuseniks will emerge as a cultural group characterised by their choice to live off the network and that some will resort to terror acts in protest against technology. 
A total of 35% of respondents disagreed with that scenario and 7% had no opinion.
"Constant change will spook some into trying to slow everyone down through horrific and catastrophic terrorist attacks against the information infrastructure and all who rely upon it," says Sean Mead, of Interbrand Analytics, who took part in the survey.
Another respondent, Ed Lyell, an expert on the internet and education, says today's 'ecoterrorists' are the harbingers of this likely trend. 
"Every age has a small percentage that cling to an overrated past of low technology, low energy lifestyle," he writes.
"Led by people who only know the idealised past, not the reality of often painful past life styles, these Luddites will use violence to seek to stop even very positive progress."
But some respondents warn against quickly applying labels to those who question the advance of technology.
"We need some strong dissenting voices about the impact of this technology in our lives," writes Denzil Meyers of Widgetwonder.
"So far, it's been mostly the promise of a cure-all, just like the past Industrial Revolution." 
The survey, which was conducted with North Carolina's Elon University, also found that a majority of internet leaders, activists and analysts questioned agree with predictions that by 2020:
&#149; A global, low-cost network will be thriving and mobile communications will be available to anyone anywhere at low cost 
&#149; English will be a universal language of global communication but other languages, such as Mandarin, could grow in prominence
&#149; Virtual reality on the internet will lead to more productivity but will also spawn new addiction problems
&#149; Humans will remain in charge of technology, even as more activity is automated and 'smart agents' proliferate, and
&#149; People will wittingly or unwittingly disclose more about themselves, gaining some benefits in the process even as they lose some privacy.
"Many of these respondents knew from history and personal experience that technologies can have good and bad effects," says Lee Rainie, director of the Pew project.
"I come away with a sense that the future is still up for grabs, even as everyone agrees that it will be very different from today."
