
There are concerns that a merger between two Sydney museums will eat up resources
International researchers are so concerned about the proposed merger between the Australian and Powerhouse museums that they are urging the government to drop its plans.
In letters to New South Wales arts minister Bob Debus obtained by ABC Science Online, they say a merger would jeopardise scientific research.
The government wants to bring both museums under one board and integrate them "at a functional level", according to a letter Debus sent to the president of the Australian Museum Trust, Brian Sherman, in August.
Professor Victor Springer, of the Smithsonian Institute's National Museum of Natural History, says such a move could jeopardise the Australian Museum's worldwide contribution to science.
"I ask you with the most sincere and profound concern to ensure that neither the quantity nor the quality of the scientific research capacity at the Australian Museum suffers as a result of the proposed merger," he says.
Others, including Professor Lee Fuiman, director of the University of Texas Marine Science Institute, and senior curator at the Royal Ontario Museum, Dr Richard Winterbottom, have also appealed for the government to drop the merger plans.
"It appears to me that if this merger were to proceed, scientific research at the Australian Museum would be marginalised or might even disappear," Fuiman writes.
Professor Richard Rosenblatt, of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography at the University of California San Diego, writes that he is concerned "the proposed merger ... will result in a loss of scientific research capacity and positions".
Australian scientists also concerned
Scientists from the University of Sydney, University of Wollongong and the Australian Marine Sciences Association have also written to express concern, as has a delegation of prominent members of the science community that is understood to have presented the government with a petition last week.
Their concerns are understood to include the fact that the Powerhouse and Australian museums have a separate history, manage different collections and have diverse research priorities.
In a letter to scientists, Debus says the government is doing a feasibility study to examine the "benefits, costs and issues" associated with combining the boards of the two museums.
He says the need to protect their expertise is a paramount concern and that the government is taking a "careful and considered approach to this matter".
But the Public Service Association of New South Wales, which represents some of the 550 staff at both museums, has described the move as a cost-cutting exercise and fait accompli that will go ahead regardless of the outcome of the study.
Director of the Australian Museum, Frank Howarth, was not available to comment.
Scorpion fish and tiny vertebrates
Among research at the Australian Museum has been the discovery of a new species of scorpion fish in Sydney Harbour and what could be the world's smallest vertebrate, the stout infantfish (Schindleria brevipinguis), in the Great Barrier Reef.
A staff member at the Australian Museum, speaking on the condition of anonymity, says there are fears that research will be cut altogether or at least downgraded under an amalgamation.
"The Powerhouse Museum doesn't have a scientific research component like we do and it would be easy to say this doesn't fit  into the new model so let's get rid of [research] all together," he says.
"There's a school of thought that says this stuff should be at universities."
He says five of the museum's 20 designated research positions are vacant and are almost certain not to be renewed in the event of a merger.
Staff have already begun looking elsewhere because of uncertainty about the museum's future, he says.
One scientist, a world leader in his field, is understood to have already accepted a job at the Natural History Museum in London.
Report due
Dr Des Griffin, who resigned in 1998 after 22 years as director of the Australian Museum, says the plan to bring the two bodies under a new, single governing body will have little benefit for either the museums or the public.
He says all areas, including scientific research, social history and collection conservation, are likely to be hit.
A steering committee consisting of departmental and museum representatives is due to report to the government on the amalgamation plan on 22 November.
The report comes amid uncertainty about how the amalgamation will proceed when Debus, who recently announced his retirement, quits parliament at the state election in  March.
