
They're in here somewhere
Researchers have made a new kind of fabric bag that can detect its contents and alert the owner when something is missing.
The Ladybag, aimed at young professional women, could put an end to leaving the house without the mobile phone, house keys or wallet.
"We are a group of six women on the team. We came up with the bag idea because we thought that all of us would use it," says team member Ginny Mesina, a student from Canada's Simon Fraser University. 
Mesina and the team developed the idea as part of a course project, which placed students from the university's interactive arts degree and the information technology degree together. 
To design the bag, the students used off-the-shelf technology.
They embedded a radio frequency identification (RFID) reader, which is powered by a 9 volt  battery, into the bottom of the bag.
They then wired the reader to a screen-like panel in the front of the bag, which contains three patterns of light-emitting diodes. 
Each pattern is an icon representing an essential item that the owner does not want to leave home without. In the prototype, these items are a set of keys, a wallet, and a mobile phone. 
They then attached an RFID sensor to each of those items. 
As long as each item is missing from the Ladybag, its corresponding icon lights up. As the keys, phone, and wallet are each placed into the bag, the icon blinks off. 
"I always forget my phone, but always remember my handbag. This is a great solution," says industrial designer Rosanna Kilfedder, a master's degree candidate at Scotlands Heriot-Watt University in Edinburgh. 
Kilfedder designed the Suntrap Handbag, a solar-powered bag that absorbs sunlight by day and then lights up when it's dark to help search for items inside. 
"I believe because people have seen how technology can make their everyday lives easier, they now want more traditional products updated to offer the same benefits," says Kilfedder. 
And for their younger sisters
The Ladybag team aims their product at 20-something women, but another version is designed to appeal to the preteen and teenager. 
That Ladybag is equipped with a light-emitting diode screen that contains seven different expressive face patterns. 
Five sensors located in different areas on the bag pick up various force and motion generated by the bag's owner and then translate that into one of the seven different light patterns. 
For example, if the person fiddles frantically with the bag, the face with a worried look will light up. If the owner hugs the bag, a happy face emoticon will light up. 
According to Mesina, the team has had a wave of unexpected attention and will be talking with the university's technology transfer department about patenting the Ladybag.
