
The scientists removed a single cell from the embryo using a technique more commonly used in IVF labs
A US biotechnology company says it has developed a way to make human embryonic stem cells without destroying the original embryo.
The development, published online today in the journal Nature, could dispel ethical objections to medical research using such cells.
"It is possible to generate stem cells without destroying the embryo and without destroying its potential for life," says Dr Robert Lanza, chief scientist at Advanced Cell Technology in Massachusetts. 
Stem cells are the body's master cells, available from many sources. But many experts believe the most powerful and versatile cells may be those taken from days-old embryos.
Scientists hope to study these cells, discover which compounds enable them to produce any kind of body tissue, and replicate that to make tailored treatments for diseases such as cancer, diabetes and Parkinson's. 
Lanza's team used a method already used in fertility treatments to remove one cell from a human embryo without harming it. The scientists then grew stem cells from that single cell.
Although the source embryos were not then implanted in a woman, the scientists say they could have been, with the potential to develop normally. 
The team used spare embryos from fertility clinics and let them grow to the 8- to 10-cell stage.
The embryo at that stage is no longer able to divide into twins but the cells can still form any cell or tissue in the body.
Lanza's team managed to get 19 different cells to grow and got two stem-cell batches, or lines. 
"These cell lines were genetically normal and retained their potential to form all of the cells in the human body, including nerve, liver, blood, vascular and retinal cells that could potentially be used to treat a range of human diseases," the researchers write. 
Dr Ronald Green, a Dartmouth College ethics professor who reviewed the experiment for the company, says he is unsure that opponents would accept this research immediately. But he believes they would eventually. 
"I think many of the opponents are going to bridle at this," he says. "People are unprepared for scientific breakthroughs to resolve these ethical issues." 
Dr Kathy Hudson, director of the Genetics and Public Policy Center at Johns Hopkins University, says questions remain over the effect of the procedure on an original embryo and the long-term health of any resulting children. 
Lanza agrees that the method should not be immediately used on people but this is worth studying.
He says his company would make any stem cell lines available to scientists for free.
