
Air pollution in Asia is increasing rainfall in parts of Australia. But scientists are concerned that could be reversed when the pollution is cleared up, therefore plunging more of Australia into drought
More of Australia could become affected by drought if its nearest neighbours start reducing air pollution, a study suggests.
Dr Leon Rotstayn of CSIRO Marine and Atmospheric Research says a new computer climate model shows aerosol pollution in Asia is having a long-distance effect on weather in Australia.
He says the modelling shows that the airborne haze made up of tiny particles from industrial and domestic pollution is cooling the land and oceans around Asia.
The haze isn't travelling to Australia. But it's been changing the balance of wind and temperature between Asia and Australia, causing heavier rainfalls in central and northwest parts of Australia.
"What has been observed in the last 50 years is that it has been getting drier in the south and east of Australia and wetter in the northwest and centre," he says.
"Our pilot modelling results suggest that the Asian haze may be driving that trend towards more rain." 
Getting rid of the haze could reverse that pattern, he says.
The research, which will be published in the  Journal of Geophysical Research early next year, is the first time researchers have tried to demonstrate the effect of aerosols on Australia's climate.
Particles
The pollution factored into the CSIRO model includes industrial and domestic emissions of particles such as black carbon, from burning diesel, and sulfide particles from coal.
Rotstayn says this aerosol pollution has a cooling effect because it forms a blanket that keeps the Sun's radiation from reaching the surface of the Earth.
The particles also cause thicker and more persistent clouds, which reflect heat back into space.
"The cooling effect of aerosols is a combination of the direct effect of stopping sunlight getting through and the indirect effect whereby the aerosols make clouds more effective," he says.
"The aerosol haze is cooling Asia and the oceans around [it] and that's affecting the monsoonal winds which bring the summer-time rainfall to the northern parts of Australia."
He says the trend could be reversed, with serious implications for Australia, if Asian emissions are reduced.
"Sooner or later those emissions will be cleaned up and a trend of increasing rainfall in the northwest and centre could be reversed," he says.
"This is potentially serious, because the northwest and centre are the only parts of Australia where rainfall has been increasing."
Not just a greenhouse problem
The study shows that we shouldn't underestimate the impact of aerosols on Australia's climate, Rotstayn says.
"We don't really have much aerosol pollution in Australia most of the time so there's been an assumption that aerosols are not very important to Australian climate. 
"But when we did these simulations ... without the aerosols we got a completely different rainfall response over Australia.
"That's suggesting [aerosols are] something we have to take very seriously if we're going to be able to predict climate change and not simply treat it as solely a greenhouse gas problem, because it clearly is not."
