
The protein soup that makes up semen can trigger serious allergic reactions in some women
Women can become allergic to their partners or other men, according to new research presented this week at a US conference.
The culprit is semen, reports Dr David Resnick, acting director of the Division of Allergy at the New York Presbyterian Hospital.
His research is due to be presented at the annual meeting of the American College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology in Philadelphia.
It isn't sperm but its accompanying proteins that can cause an allergic response, a phenomenon that allergy experts are recognising more often, he says.
While there have been no reported deaths from an allergic response to semen, some women may require hospitalisation after experiencing difficulty breathing, hives and swelling.
Less severe cases may result in itching, burning and swelling after intercourse. 
More women may have the reaction than are aware of it, says Resnick. 
"Some women think there's another problem [such as an infection or condom allergy]," Resnick says.
"[But] in one survey, out of 1073 women who sought related information from a researcher, approximately 13% were determined to have a semen allergy."
Sufferers, Resnick explains, produce an antibody that recognises the proteins in a partner's semen.
The antibody triggers a powerful immune response, similar in mild cases to hay fever. Some women are only allergic to the semen of a certain partner, but others react to multiple men.
Other allergens can be transmitted through the seminal fluid.
These include medications such as penicillin, and even some foods and beverages, such as walnuts and soft drinks. Women with other allergies tend to be more prone to semen allergies.
What can we do about it?
Two basic types of treatment are available. The first is similar to standard allergy treatments that expose a sufferer to the allergen in diluted doses. 
The second involves removing other proteins known to sometimes interfere with the desensitisation process from the semen plasma, and then injecting a small amount of the processed semen at regular intervals.
In both cases, frequent sexual contact is needed after the treatment.
"We actually had one case where the male spouse was unable to engage in such frequent intercourse, so his wife developed the allergy again," says Resnick. 
Jonathan Bernstein, a professor of medicine at the University of Cincinnati, and one of the world's leading experts on semen allergies, says he agrees with Resnick.
But he believes that the processed semen, though a more expensive treatment, would be more effective.
Bernstein also believes the allergy is probably underreported.
"It may not be as rare as people think," he says. "The allergy may go unrecognised, yet it can have a significant effect on relationships."
