
Is the whinny a horse makes when it sees someone it likes different from the one it makes when it sees someone it doesn't like?
A new database of horse talk and behaviour could help take the mystery out of a horse whisperer's job, US researchers hope.
Physicist David Browning, an adjunct professor at the University of Rhode Island, and Dr Peter Scheifele, a research associate at the University of Connecticut are compiling the database in an attempt to correlate nuances in horse whinnies with their differences stress levels.
They announced their Equine Vocalization Project last week at an Acoustical Society of America meeting in Providence, Rhode Island.
The information could help shed light on the communication styles of other equines, such as donkeys and zebras, and even improve how veterinarians, behaviourists, breeders or other animal handlers relate to horses.
"You would like to find that you get a particular whinny for a particular situation," says Browning.
Snorts, blows, sighs and whinnies
Unlike the monotonal vocalisations of cows, goats, and sheep, horses emit a range of sounds from snorts, blows and sighs to whinnies, which also come in the form of nickers and squeals.
Browning's initial acoustical studies have shown that whinnies have the greatest changes in frequency and could contain information about specific situations.
When horses are stressed, their vocalisations peak into a high-pitched screams; when they are calm, their whinnies modulate in the middle tones.
But scientists are still not sure if the changes in frequency can be connected to more specific conditions.
Browning and Scheifele have begun compiling their database of horse vocalisations from their own recordings and from those of other researchers. The vocalisations are analysed with acoustic software that plots the sound over time.
They have been categorising the vocalisations by behaviour in order to answer some basic questions. 
For example, horses have a good memory and can recognise friends, both human and horse. Browning would like to know if the whinny they make when they see someone they like is different from one they make upon seeing someone they don't like.
Zebras that bark like a dog
As part of the project, Browning will also be collecting vocalisations of three species of zebra - one that brays like a donkey, one that whinnies like a horse, and one that barks like a dog - to try and get a more complete picture of equine vocalisations.
Dr Sarah Ralston an associate professor at the Equine Science Center at Rutgers University, isn't sure how much the study will contribute to the practicality of handling horses. 
But she does think that comparing the vocalisation of horses and zebras could provide some insight into the social organisation of different equines.
"One [zebra] is like a horse with harems and lives in groups, whereas another is more solitary. Differences in vocalisations might reflect differences in the social organisation," she says.
