
NASA engineers have made minor tweaks to the design of Discovery's external fuel tank. But they are waiting until after the next launch to redesign small foam wedges of insulation
The US space agency says it will not make any more changes to the design of the shuttle's fuel tank until after the next flight, despite ongoing concerns about foam insulation breaking off and damaging the shuttle during launch.
NASA's shuttle program manager Wayne Hale acknowledged a slight risk that a small chunk of foam could break off from a newly exposed part of the external fuel tank and critically damage Discovery's heat shield during its proposed July launch. 
The insulation prevents ice from building up and breaking off during launch. 
Shuttle Columbia and its crew of seven astronauts were lost during atmospheric re-entry in February 2003, due to wing damage from a piece of foam insulation that fell off and hit the shuttle during launch. 
The tank was redesigned, but foam from another part of the tank was lost during the first post-Columbia launch of Discovery last July. 
Engineers then removed two aerodynamic ramps of foam that had protected a box of cables and two pressurisation lines from the tremendous winds and turbulence created by the shuttle's supersonic climb to orbit. 
Hale says the ramps' removal was "the largest aerodynamic change that we have made since the shuttle first flew". 
Tests to determine if the new design is safe to fly remain under way.
After much debate, Hale decided making more than a major change in the tank's design was riskier than the slight chance of a critical impact by the small foam wedges. Those chunks cover metal brackets that attach the cable tray and pressurisation lines to the outside of the tank. 
"We had to ask whether it's appropriate to make more than one change to the outer shell of the vehicle," Hale says. "If we go fly and have another accident that will be the end of the program." 
Upon Discovery's safe return, engineers will redesign the small foam wedges, Hale adds. 
NASA wants to fly the shuttle another 16 or 17 more times to complete construction of the International Space Station and possibly service the Hubble Space Telescope before the fleet is retired in 2010. 
Managers expect to make a decision about whether the shuttle's redesigned tank is safe to fly at a review scheduled for mid-June. 
NASA's next opportunity to fly a shuttle to the space station under its post-Columbia safety protocols, which include a daylight launch, is 1-19 July.
