
Mature cells retain the genetic capacity to grow into all cell types needed to regenerate an entire organism, scientists say
Scientists say they have cloned mice from white blood cells with a similar technique used to create Dolly the sheep.
The US researchers, who publish their results online in the journal Nature Genetics, say their method shows it is possible to clone animals from mature cells.
They say their findings counter the argument that truly mature tissue is too old to be regenerated.
Dr Jerry Yang of the University of Connecticut, Dr Tao Cheng of the University of Pittsburgh, and colleagues cloned mice using fully differentiated, or mature, white blood cells called granulocytes. 
They used somatic cell nuclear transfer, in which the nucleus from a cell of the animal to be cloned is injected into an egg whose nucleus has been removed.
This process works very poorly in mice and usually a two-step procedure is needed: first growing tiny embryos, then removing their embryonic stem cells to generate mouse pups. 
Yang's team tried cloning using the blood cells at various levels of development, from the stem cells stage through to full maturity, called full differentiation.
"What was surprising, the efficiency went up as we got more differentiated cells," Yang says.
"That was very, very surprising, very shocking to us." 
Only the fully mature granulocytes were able to produce two live cloned pups, although both died within a few hours of birth, the researchers report. 
"Even we were surprised to find fully differentiated cells were more efficient for cloning, because granulocytes are not capable of dividing," Cheng says. 
"In fact, we repeated our experiments six times just to be sure. Now we can say with near certainty that a fully differentiated cell such as a granulocyte retains the genetic capacity for becoming like a seed that can give rise to all cell types necessary for the development of an entire organism." 
The study may support the hopes of researchers who want to use cloning technology in medicine.
Supporters of so-called therapeutic cloning want to some day be able to take a single cell from a patient, perhaps a skin cell, and use it to generate tailor-made tissue or organ transplants. 
To do so, fully mature cells must maintain the ability to regress and be reprogrammed.
