
Radio tags have been used to track cattle for decades, where a security glitch is hardly a matter of national security. But how secure are the RFID tags in your passport?
High-tech passports, touted as advances in national security, can be spied on remotely and their identifying radio signals cloned, computers hackers were shown at a weekend conference. 
Radio frequency identification technology, or RFID, used in cash cards and passports, can be copied, blocked or imitated, says Melanie Rieback, a privacy researcher at Vrije University in the Netherlands. 
Hacked chips could be used to launch attacks on software in computers linked to scanning devices, the doctorate student says.
Rieback demonstrated a device she and colleagues built to hijack the RFID signals that manufacturers say can't be read by anything other than proprietary scanners. 
The device is also designed to block scanners, legitimate or illicit, reading a tag.
The researchers expect to have a reliable portable version of their device finished in six months and have "no plans to immediately mass-produce these things". 
A cheer rose from the legion of hackers in the conference room when Rieback announced that the schematics and the computer codes for the device would be made public. 
"The industry and government needs to not be scared of us," Rieback says. 
She says RFID equipment makers would be wise to ramp up encryption and other security. 
"If you are using RFID [to track] cows, who cares?" Rieback asks. "But with a passport, it only takes one breach at the wrong time and it could wreck it for the RFID industry." 
RFID tags consist of a computer chips wrapped with tiny radio antennas. The chips store financial, identity, or other data that can then be sent to scanners by radio signals. 
US retail behemoth Wal-Mart about two years ago embarked on a campaign to use RFID to track inventories and shipments from suppliers, and the devices are used to track cargo in shipping containers. 
RFID tags have been used for decades to track cattle or wild animals. 
Pet owners also have chips, about the size of grains of rice, implanted under the skin of their dogs or cats so they can be identified and returned if they run away.
The European Central Bank has talked of putting RFID technology in euro currency, and such tags were used in World Cup Soccer tickets, according to the researcher. 
Smart chips are being put into passports. Stores have experimented with using the tags not only to track inventory, but to bill shoppers for purchases invisibly as they leave.
"It has been ... creating quite a stir," Rieback says of RFID use.
