
The study relied on over 50 ice cores collected from a range of locations around Antarctica
A new study that shows Antarctic snowfalls have changed little in 50 years, despite global warming, could be evidence that the worst is yet to come, says one of the authors.
A study published today in the journal Science reports that, contrary to expectations, snowfall in Antarctica has not increased over the past 50 years.
This contradicts the predictions of most climate models that are based on the assumption that warming air can carry more moisture and produce greater snowfalls at the poles.
"The models predict that Antarctic snowfall should be increasing with a warming atmosphere," says Australian team member and palaeoclimatologist Dr Ian Goodwin, of the University of Newcastle.
Goodwin doesn't challenge this basic climate physics. But says the recent evidence supports the idea, not recognised in climate models, that there is a lag between global warming and Antarctica's response to it.
The reason is that Antarctica and the southern hemisphere are surrounded by large oceans that take a long time to heat and therefore act as a buffer to climate change.
Recent evidence suggests the lag time could be up to 60 years, says Goodwin.
"We can be relatively complacent about the effects of climate change in the Southern Hemisphere because we haven't seen dramatic changes," he says.
"But the frightening thing I think is that we are not yet seeing the full impact of global warming in the southern hemisphere. But it's just around the corner."
Natural cycles
Goodwin and colleagues published a study in 1991 that showed an increase in snowfall in east Antarctica.
But, the new study shows that since then, the amount of snow falling in that area has decreased.
Goodwin and colleagues used direct measurement of snowfall and more than 50 ice cores to reconstruct annual snowfall over the past 50 years.
He says the study demonstrates a previously unknown natural climate cycle, affecting the whole of Antarctica.
"On one side of Antarctica in some decades we see an increase in accumulation [of snow] and on the other side of Antarctica we see a decrease and so it balances out to zero net gain," he says.
Goodwin says this variability is so great it could mask any changes due to global warming.
But, he says, it could only be a matter of time before the natural cycle becomes dwarfed by the changes brought about by global warming.
And this is where he says the lag time becomes important.
"If we were to rewrite this paper in say 10 years time the likelihood is that we will be actually be writing a paper that says 'significant change in Antarctic snowfall over the last 10 to 15 years'," says Goodwin.
"In all likelihood we're about to see, in the next couple of decades, a very large response to global warming in Antarctic and Southern Ocean regions."
Goodwin says that the new research should now feed into climate models and make them more accurate.
