
Discovery poised for launch
Bad weather has forced the US space agency to postpone the launch of the space shuttle Discovery.
The next launch is set for 04:38 Wednesday Australian Eastern Standard Time (18:38 Tuesday UTC). 
The decision by NASA to cancel lift-off came minutes after the seven crew members boarded the spaceship, even before the vessel's hatch was closed.
Hours before, NASA forecasters estimated there was only a 30&nbsp;% chance that weather conditions would favour a launch, as thunderclouds menaced the Kennedy Space Center. 
"We've concluded that we're not going to have a chance to launch today," launch director Mike Leinbach told the crew as they sat strapped into their shuttle seats. 
"OK, we copy," said shuttle commander Steve Lindsey. "Looking out the window, it doesn't look good today, and we think that's a great plan."
Too many risks
The mission management team's chairman John Shannon confirmed bad weather had prevented the launch.
"We had the vehicle ready to go, the crew ready to go and it's just that one thing that we really don't control, the weather, that kept us from launching," he told reporters.
Any rain during lift-off might damage the spaceship's heat-shielding tiles, and a lightning strike could knock out the computers that control the ship. 
Even thick, high clouds can make a launch hazardous.
Discovery's mission is only the second since the 2003 Columbia accident, and another disaster or serious problem could end the shuttle program.
NASA is hoping to fly 16 more missions to complete the A$134.5 billion (US$100 billion) space station before the shuttle fleet is retired in 2010. 
Debates over safety
Shuttle safety has been at the forefront of the program since Columbia disintegrated on re-entry in 2003, killing seven astronauts.
NASA has twice redesigned the shuttle's fuel tank, which shed insulating foam that triggered the accident. 
The agency's top engineer and chief of safety wanted more repairs on the tank before Discovery was launched, but NASA administrator Michael Griffin overruled them, arguing that if foam falls again from the fuel tank and damages the shuttle, the crew could stay aboard the space station and await rescue.
Griffin says the debate over safety is a good thing. 
"NASA had been criticised in the past for adhering to groupthink, for enforcing a needless conformity in decision-making," he said on CNN's Late Edition."
"We have difficult, technically complex and subtle decisions to make ... We did the best analysis we can, and we make a decision, and I'm comfortable with that." 
Delaying the launch would put more pressure on the shuttles, which are the only vehicles that can deliver and install the station's remaining trusses, solar arrays and laboratories. 
The agency plans two more flights this year and about four a year until the station is finished and the fleet is retired. 
NASA had hoped to resume space station construction last year, but the shuttle's fuel tank failed its first test flight.
Engineers then removed two long wind deflectors from the tank, which had shed foam during Discovery's 2005 lift-off.
