
Is technology a match for evolution? And does this mean that modern humans are still evolving?
New evidence that the hobbit made the stone tools found alongside it might be evidence that humans are still evolving, says an Australian researcher.
The use of technology doesn't mean we have outwitted evolutionary selection pressures, says Dr Mark Moore, an expert on ancient stone flaking technology at the University of New England.
He made the comments in light of research published in today's issue of the journal Nature on how early hominids used tools on the Indonesian island of Flores.
Some scientists have recently argued that the tools found alongside the hobbit at the Liang Bua cave are too complex to have been made by anyone but modern humans.
But Moore, along with Australian and Indonesian colleagues, think otherwise.
The team analysed the techniques used to make over 500 tools found at Mata Menge, a site about 50 kilometres from where the hobbit was found.
The researchers say although the tools would have been made 700,000 years before the hobbit was around, they seemed just as complex as the ones found alongside it.
The researchers say the tools were probably made by ancestors of Homo floresiensis, suggesting a long history of toolmaking on the island.
This supports the idea that the hobbit, even with its small brain, was capable of making the tools found alongside it, says Moore.
He previously reported that such tools could be made without the degree of forethought usually associated with modern humans.
"The techniques used to make [the tools] aren't quite as sophisticated as a lot of archaeologists would have you believe," says Moore.
"They are certainly within the capabilities of a small-brained hominid."
Implications for evolution
Those who discovered the hobbit believe it evolved from a larger bodied, larger brained ancestor that shrank over time as it was isolated on the island.
The fact that the hominid could still make stone tools despite its shrinking brain suggests toolmaking was key to survival on the island.
This supports the argument that technology helps humans survive changing environments. 
But Moore thinks it also tells us that technology doesn't protect us from evolutionary selection pressures, like predators or other environmental factors that affect our survival.
The environment is a bigger force than we give it credit for, he says.
"There's an underlying assumption in the popular media, in particular, and amongst some scientists, that since we adapt to our environment through technology that somehow this is buffering us from the forces of natural selection," says Moore.
But, he says, the use of technology by the hobbit's ancestors to adapt to their environment did not stop them from shrinking in response to selection pressures.
"Even thought they had a technological adaptation to the environment it didn't mean that they had stopped evolving," says Moore. "They clearly had continued evolving. Technology was not able to stop that from happening."
He says this could be relevant to current debates over whether modern humans are evolving.
"We are so surrounded by technology every day," says Moore. "But that doesn't necessarily mean that the environment isn't also having an effect."
