
A base on the Moon would be used to test technologies needed for future trips to Mars
The US space agency says it plans to build a permanently occupied base on the Moon, most likely at its south pole. 
The base will serve as a science outpost as well as a testbed for technologies needed for future travel to Mars, NASA says.
Construction will follow a series of flights to the Moon scheduled to begin by 2020.
"We're going for a base on the Moon," says Dr Scott Doc Horowitz, NASA's associate administrator for exploration from the Johnson Space Center in Houston.
Plans for what the base will look like and what astronauts would do there have yet to be determined.
Similarly, NASA has not projected a date when the base would go into operation. 
The Moon's polar sites are preferred to equatorial regions because of more moderate temperatures and longer periods of sunlight, which is critical for the solar-powered electrical systems NASA plans to develop.
Eventually, nuclear power may be used to augment or replace the solar energy systems. 
Scientists also suspect the poles have resources such as hydrogen, ice and other materials that could be used to support life. 
"It's exciting," says NASA deputy administrator Shana Dale. "We don't know as much about the polar regions."
The US has already announced plans to develop new spacecraft to travel to the Moon and land on its surface for the first time since the last Apollo flight there in 1972.
It also plans to provide a communications system linking Earth and the Moon. 
But NASA doesn't plan to go to the Moon alone. The US will look for international and commercial partners to share the expense and possibly provide components such as additional power systems, living quarters and resources for lunar surface travel. 
NASA is not expecting a budget increase to pay for the program. Rather, it will transition funds currently being used to support the space shuttle into the Moon exploration program as the shuttle fleet is phased out. 
The shuttles are set to be retired in 2010. By that time, NASA plans to have finished building the space station, leaving the Moon initiative as a successor to both programs.
