
Paternal age can have an impact on the health of newborn babies, research suggests
The babies of older dads tend to be less robust immediately after birth than infants fathered by younger men, a new study shows.
The research, published in the current issue of the journal Epidemiology, shows that new fathers in their 40s and 50s are slightly more likely to have an infant with a low Apgar score than fathers in their 20s. 
The Apgar score, which was first created in 1952, rates the newborn on respiratory effort, heart rate, reflex irritability, muscle tone and skin colour with a value of 0 to 2 for each.
The score is calculated at one and five minutes after birth and a score of 10 is the best result.
In recent years, several reports have linked advanced paternal age with various adverse pregnancy outcomes, including foetal death and premature birth.
But little was known about the impact, if any, on the physical condition of the infant at birth.
What the records show
To investigate, Dr Yuelian Sun, from the University of Aarhus in Denmark and colleagues analysed data from more than 70,000 couples who had a first infant born between 1980 and 1996. 
The team reports that compared with fathers in their 20s, those between 45 and 49 years of age and those 50 years of age or older were 64% and 49% more likely, respectively, to have an infant with a one minute Apgar score between 1 and 3. 
Fathers 45 years of age or older were at increased risk of having an infant with a five minute Apgar score of less than 7. 
"The biologic link between advanced paternal age and low Apgar scores is unknown," Sun and colleagues say. 
However, some studies have shown that "expression of specific paternal genes is crucial for the placental development and that chromosomal aberrations tend to increase with paternal age." 
Reproductive medicine expert Professor Robert Jansen from the University of Sydney says fathers aged over 60 are also more likely to have children with serious genetic defects.
"In really old men you start getting some rare conditions happening ... like dwarfism," he says.
Professor Mark Bowman, a expert in male infertility and lecturer in obstetrics and gynaecology at Sydney University says the results could be a reflection of maternal problems.
"You'd expect this would be a female effect," he says.
"Older women are more likely to have babies with problems and older women have older husbands."
