
One day you might be greeted by a talking, thinking computer-animated face like this one when booking a ticket, or withdrawing money from the bank
Talking, thinking cartoon faces that understand our needs may one day improve our chances of getting what we want from computers, say experts.
The animated faces may replace the mouse, keyboard and the touch screen as the main way we interact with computers, say when booking tickets or withdrawing money from the bank.
Professor Denis Burnham, director of the MARCS Auditory Laboratories at the University of Western Sydney, says a talking, thinking head could be available in the next 10 years.
"At the moment we use keyboards and mouses [to communicate]," says Burnham, a behavioural psychologist.
"[But] what people really want with computers is that they actually understand what you're doing and know what you want and can interact with you a lot more effectively and naturally."
Burnham is heading up a new A$3.4 million (US$2.5 million) project, funded by the Australian Research Council and the National Health and Medical Research Council, to develop a computer-generated head that emulates face-to-face conversation.
Burnham's team will use technologies such as computer animation, speech recognition and computer-generated dialogue to construct the talking, thinking head.
And the researchers will use cognitive science to evaluate and improve how well it communicates.
Frustrated?
From the word processor's irritating 'paper clip man' to frustrating telephone automated directory services, success so far in this arena has been somewhat limited.
Burnham hopes his team's talking, thinking head will make our conversations with artifically intelligent machines more effective for two reasons.
First, it will include visual cues, such as different mouth shapes and face expressions that help us understand what is being said. 
Second, the head will be capable of tailoring its communication to different types of people, by accessing different databases. 
It would select articulation, intonation, facial expression or vocabulary to best suit the person it's talking to, says Burnham.
He says such a head on a videophone could make automated directory assistance more effective at communicating with children, or people with accents or hearing disabilities.
It might also remember different individuals and personalise its interactions with them, and have appropriate emotional responses when the need arises, Burnham says.
The head might even "switch to sympathetic mode" when we get irate with it for not understanding us correctly.
Learning all the time
Burnham says he plans to develop a head that is also able to learn from its interactions with different people and improve its communication.
He says current prototype heads are used in tourist information kiosks, for ticketing and language instruction.
One project is also exploring the use of a talking, thinking head as a personal companion and minder for elderly or disabled people.
Burnham says the project will initially explore two scenarios where the head might be useful: dealing with billing complaints and language tuition.
