
Tiny cleaner fish grooming a large client fish
Fish who visit mobile 'cleaning stations' to get their parasites removed, check out the cleaner fish on duty first to make sure they get the most trustworthy fish for the job.
Dr Alexandra Grutter and colleagues from the University of Queensland's School of Integrative Biology report their experiments with the Great Barrier Reef coral reef cleaner fish (Labroides dimidiatus), in today's issue of the journal Nature.
A cleaner fish spends most of its day eating parasites off other 'client' fish.
But cleaners are tempted to cheat at their cleaning job because they would much rather eat the sticky mucous lining that covers their clients, instead of the parasites.
So how do client fish get cleaner fish to eat against their natural food preference and establish a cooperative cleaning-feeding service?
Grutter says the answer lies in the fact that client fish watch cleaners while they are with other clients to see who is doing a good job to judge who to use themselves.
Fish care about their image
Grutter used an aquarium-based experiment in which client fish were offered the choice of interacting with two cleaner fish: one that displayed parasite-eating behaviour, and one that did not. 
Given the choice between two such cleaners, clients preferred to spend time close to the parasite-eating cleaner. 
And cleaner fish were more likely to do the right thing when they were being observed by other clients than when they were alone with one client. 
The researchers think the client fish build up a social image of the cleaners they observe, and choose to allow those that score highly to feed on them.
Grutter says cleaners learned to be more cooperative when they were having their image scored, compared to when they weren't.
"These results explain why cleaner fish feed against their preference," she says.
The finding shows that complex social networks exist in the aquatic world, and helps set the stage for the evolution of altruism and reputation, the researchers say.
