
Could you be churning out your own car from a desktop factory in 15 years?
Within 15 years, desktop nanofactories could pump out anything from a new car to a novel nanoweapon, says a technology commentator.
And he warns that society needs to start preparing for this brave new world.
Mike Treder from the Center for Responsible Nanotechnology (CRN) in New York says advanced nanotechnology, like these nanofactories, could help solve world poverty but it could also wreak economic and social chaos.
"It's the biggest challenge we've ever faced as a species," says Treder, who has been addressing scientists in Australia this week.
CRN is a non-profit organisation advised among others by the so-called father of nanotechnology, Dr Eric Drexler.
The organisation says it aims to raise awareness about the benefits and dangers of molecular manufacturing, the precise assembly of products atom-by-atom.
While molecular manufacturing is not yet a reality, Treder says researchers are already working on building molecular-scale machines that could eventually move atoms around to make products. 
And he says that in less than 15 years, nanoscale factories could be making consumer products from cups and chairs to cars and house bricks. 
Raw materials like carbon would be pumped into the nanofactory, where atoms would be rearranged to make products according to programs downloaded from the internet, says Treder.
Warnings
Treder says such desktop nanofactories could help reduce poverty and starvation in developing nations, and provide tremendous medical benefits. But society needs to guard against its potential risks.
In particular, he says CRN is concerned that these desktop nanofactories would lead to a nano "arms race" in which hard-to-detect nanoweapons could be designed, manufactured and tested much quicker than they are today.
"Imagine a suitcase filled with billions of toxin-carrying flying robots that could be released anywhere to target a population," he says.
"You could make a suitcase full of these things overnight for a few dollars."
The mass production of consumer goods by private desktop factories could also trigger social chaos due to economic disruption, says Treder.
"If I can make my own car at home for a couple of hundred dollars with a design downloaded from the internet that means I'm not a customer of the auto dealer down the road."
Waste from such easy manufacturing, or nanolitter, is another issue that needs to be thought about, he says. As is the prospect of nanospam.
