
The shapes and colours of this abalone shell are governed by genes that are expressed in precise locations beneath its shell
Scientists have found the genes responsible for the spectacular kaleidoscope of shapes, patterns and colours that are the hallmark of tropical abalone, edible marine snails found in Australia's Great Barrier Reef.
Researchers say the vibrant range of patterns and colours on their shell mirror the expression of specific genes in the mollusc's mantle, the umbrella of skin just below the shell.
The international research team publish its findings in the journal BMC Biology.
All snails have a mantle, which creates their shell. But marine snails don't build their shells from within.
"Instead they release molecules into the sea water and then pull together things like calcium and chalk from the water [to add to the molecules to create their shells]," says Australian co-author Professor Bernie Degnan, from the University of Queensland.
"So the beautiful shells you see are actually the product of taking things out of the sea water."
This combination of secreted molecules and molecules from the sea acts to strengthen the shell.
Mystery molecules
The research team was interested in finding out which molecules the marine snail releases through its mantle.
To do this, they sequenced 530 randomly-selected genes in the mantle tissue of the Haliotis asinina abalone.
They then collaborated with German colleagues from the University of G&ouml;ttingen to analyse how these genes are expressed.
The team identified 331 genes that encode proteins expressed in the mantle, a quarter of which are secreted. 
Each gene is expressed in a specific part of the mantle, with each area responsible for creating a specific shape, pattern or colour on the shell.
"What happens is that the mantle secretes proteins and somehow these proteins interact with the seawater to make the shell," Degnan says.
By comparing the abalone DNA sequences with the genome of a related mollusc, the team showed that the genes encoding the secreted mantle proteins are likely to be rapidly evolving.
