
The latest study on the best time of year to shear sheep overturns 20 years of thinking
Farmers who want to produce better quality wool don't necessarily need to shear their sheep in autumn, Australian researchers have found.
Angus Campbell, a PhD student from the University of Melbourne, and colleagues show that there's no particular shearing season that consistently improves wool strength.
That finding could have important implications for Australia's multi-billion dollar wool industry.
For the past 20 years or so, many farmers have sheared their sheep in autumn in the hope of getting better quality fibres and a higher price for their wool.
"The idea behind this is that wool gets thinner in summer and then thickens in late autumn," Campbell says.
This would make the wool stronger because it would be thin on the end but thicker and stronger in the middle.
To test this theory, Campbell and his colleagues designed a study that used real life conditions on two commercial Merino farms west of Geelong in Victoria.
Each year for five years, they sheared 1000 ewes and lambs in three different seasons and measured the quality of the wool.
One-third of the sheep were shorn in December, one-third in March and another third in May.
"These were three realistic shearing times based on other research and talking to wool growers," he says.
The result? "The wool strength from those three shearing times was the same," Campbell says.
The connection between wool fibre thickness and season has more to do with nutrition than weather, the researcher explains.
In summer the fibres tend to get thinner as the flocks rely more on dried feed, while the rains of autumn bring protein-rich green grass, which makes the wool quickly get thicker.
But in spring, when many farmers have their sheep bearing lambs, a similar thing happens because the ewes devote all their energy into growing the lamb, and not into the wool.
"This all means that among ewes and lambs no annual shearing time is going to consistently shear through the weak part of the fibre," Campbell says.
In a way, the results are good news for farmers, he says.
"It means that if a farmer has a really good reason for choosing a shearing time based on something specific to the farm, then I reckon they can go ahead and do it and not worry about it harming their wool value," he says.
Campbell's research will form part of his PhD, which is to be submitted later this year.
