
A colonial siphonophore, which grows to 1.5 centimetres, found off the coast of Broome in northwestern Australia
A Jurassic 'shrimp' thought extinct 50 million years ago has been found in Australian waters, a census of marine life shows.
Neoglyphea neocaledonica, found on an underwater peak in the Coral Sea, is the oldest marine organism listed in the 2006 Census of Marine Life, a global effort involving 70 nations.
The census, which is due for completion in 2010, also found marine creatures thriving by a record hot volcanic vent in the Atlantic and in dark waters under thick Antarctic ice.
Researchers also found 150 new types of fish among 500 new marine species, including furry crabs and a lobster off Madagascar.
Many species were found in places long thought too hostile for life including by a vent spewing liquids at 407&deg;C and other habitats that are dark, cold or deep.
Some places seem as inhospitable as planets such as Mars or Venus, the researchers say. 
"The age of discovery is not over," says Jesse Ausubel, a program manager at the US Sloan Foundation, a sponsor of the 10-year census.
Among discoveries in 2006 are shrimps, clams and bacteria living by the searing 407&deg;C vent on the floor of the Atlantic Ocean north of Ascension Island, the hottest sea vent ever documented and more than hot enough to melt lead.
"This is the most extreme environment and there is plenty of life around it," says Professsor Chris German, of the UK's National Oceanography Centre and a leader of the Atlantic survey.
He says one big puzzle is how creatures cope with shifts in temperatures. For instance, water on the seabed at 3000 metres is just 2&deg;C yet many creatures withstand near-boiling temperatures of up to 80&deg;C from the thermal vent.
German says it is a bit like a person agreeing to live in a blistering sauna and be hosed at random with freezing water. 
Scientists have not yet probed how hardy the microbes nearest the hottest part of the vent are.
Another expedition found crustaceans, jellyfish and single-celled creatures living in darkness in the Weddell Sea off Antarctica under ice 700 metres thick and 200 kilometres from open water. Most of those creatures are new to science. 
"You can think of it as a cave, one of the remotest caves on Earth," Ausubel says of findings by a robot camera. 
"Wherever we've gone on Earth we've continued to find life," German says, adding that recent discoveries could be encouraging for the search for life elsewhere in the universe.
The biggest new species in the census is probably a 1.8 kilomgram rock lobster found off Madagascar. A furry crab, dubbed a 'Yeti crab', was also found off Easter Island.
In the longest migration ever documented, census researchers tracked sooty shearwater birds on a 70,000 kilometre flight sweeping round the Pacific in 200 days, an average 350 kilometres a day.
