
Given a choice, goats like the taste of truffles, onions, apples and garlic. But when faced with oranges, like these ones on the Greek island of Crete, they just can't refuse
Goats and sheep prefer the taste of truffles, according to a new study that shows these ruminants have a wide palate with some suprising favourite flavours.
The study, published in the May issue of the journal Small Ruminant Research, found that while sheep and goats have similar tastes, sheep have a more discriminating palate.
"Flavour does appear to be more important to sheep than to goats," says Australian co-author and CSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems researcher Professor Iain Gordon.
"We didn't test why this is the case, but it may be because goats generally have a more catholic [varied] diet than do sheep in the natural world, and so will eat a range of things with different flavours."
In order of preference, sheep enjoy truffle, garlic, onion, apple, caramel, maple and orange flavours, according to the new research. Goats prefer truffle, onion, apple and garlic.
Gordon and his colleagues recruited 10 male Scottish blackface sheep (Ovis aries) and 10 male feral hybrid goats (Capra hircus) as taste testers.
The researchers treated nutritionally-enhanced food pellets with a range of synthetic, human-grade flavourings, avoiding the bitter flavours goats and sheep tend to dislike.
After the animals fasted for an hour, the researchers presented basins containing the flavoured feeds for 30 minutes.
By weighing each basin at the end of the taste test, the researchers determined how much food of each flavour the ruminants ate. 
Taking the taste test
Both sheep and goats chowed down on the more pungent, earthy flavoured feeds, shunning strawberries.
"My view regarding these flavours is that they are highly attractive, even though rare, because of health affects associated with consumption, for example anti-parasitic [action on] worms for garlic and onion," says Gordon.
He also explains that the researchers did not give real truffles, onions and other foods associated with the flavours to the animals because they wanted to study the animals' preferences for flavours alone, independent of nutritional content.
Dr Alan Duncan, a nutritional ecologist at The Macaulay Institute in Aberdeen, Scotland, says the flavour rankings "make sense".
"Both species tended to prefer flavours they might naturally encounter, such as the fungi-type truffle flavour and the onion and garlic flavours, which are found in the wild representatives of both cultivated vegetables," he says.
"The fruity flavours tended to be avoided, and this is unsurprising since fruits do not generally feature in the repertoire of natural foods encountered by ruminant herbivores.
"I was slightly surprised that sheep showed stronger preferences than goats. Sheep are predominantly a grazing animal, whereas goats readily consume shrubs and woody vegetation."
Now that these preferences are known, Gordon and Duncan suggest, the flavours might be added to feed to encourage livestock to eat, particularly when new foods are introduced.
