
Not breathing while training with weights can increase the pressure on your eyes, potentially leading to glaucoma
Holding your breath while you're weight lifting can increase the risk of developing eye disease and potentially blindness, a study says.
Weight lifters who don't breathe while they're training can experience temporary increases in eye pressure that could heighten the risk of developing glaucoma, according to a study published in the Archives of Ophthalmology this week.
Researchers at the Catholic University of Brasilia in Brazil measured the intraocular pressure of 30 men aged 18 to 40 during a bench press session.
"We tested subjects performing a bench press, a popular exercise in [gyms]," the researchers say.
A bench press is done by lying on your back on a bench and raising a bar bell above your chest.
The researchers measured eye pressure while the subjects were holding their breath and compared this to when they were exhaling.
The study found that eye pressure increased more if they were holding their breath than if they were breathing. 
According to the findings, 90% of subjects had an increase in eye pressure when they didn't exhale while doing the bench presses, compared with 62% who did.
"The mean intraocular pressure increased significantly during weight lifting," the researchers conclude.
"Prolonged weightlifting could be a potential risk factor for the development or progression of glaucoma."
Musicians also at risk
Glaucoma is a condition associated with pressure on the eye. The pressure slowly destroys the optic nerve at the back of the eye, causing vision impairment and possible blindness.
The researchers say the form of glaucoma relevant to weight lifters is known as normal-tension, or low-tension glaucoma.
This is most common in people who experience frequent changes in eye pressure.
The disease can be hard to pick up because it develops even though eye pressure is normal when it's measured in routine checks.
It's also more common among people who play high-resistance wind instruments or those with asthma or intestinal or urinary tract blockages.
"Intermittent intraocular pressure increases during weightlifting should be suspected in patients with normal tension glaucoma who perform such exercises," the authors conclude.
