
This pampered pooch walks the same way as a greyhound or a labrador. But why is the US military interested?
Labradors and dachshunds appear to waddle, while greyhounds seem to march by with a fast clip.
But new research shows the basic mechanics behind dog walking is the same for all canines. 
The discovery could lead to a better understanding of health issues related to the way dogs walk, like hip problems, the researchers say.
And it could also result in improvements to four-legged, dog-like robots, which the US military is already investigating.
"The big benefit would be to show how robot dogs should walk more efficiently," says lead scientist Dr Jim Usherwood, a researcher from the Structure and Motion Laboratory at the University of London's Royal Veterinary College.
"Almost all robots require a large amount of power - much higher than an animal would use - partly because they tend to use bent legs. I show what would happen with stiff legs," Usherwood adds.
Inspired by stiff-legged mechanical toys that can walk down hills, Usherwood and his team designed several different computer models for dog walking. The researchers then compared these models with observations of actual dogs on a treadmill. 
Their simple, passive, stiff-limbed computer model best matched and explained the principles underlying dog walking. 
The findings were recently presented at the annual meeting of the  Society for Experimental Biology in the UK. 
Like controlled falling
Walking for both bipeds and quadrupeds is like controlled falling because, with each step, the individual leans forward and is 'caught' by an outstretched limb.
As a result, there is a stage when the body is high and slow, and a stage when the body is lower and faster, Usherwood explains. 
"With a four-legged animal, this has broadly been observed before, but it had not been clear why and when these motions should happen," he says.
"My passive model makes it much easier to understand when and why the body moves up and down and changes in speed." 
The model also found that walking happens on relatively stiff limbs, unlike trotting, where a dog's legs function like springs and tend to bend more. 
This is true for bipeds such as humans. But he says people put more energy into extending their legs, while dogs appear to power themselves with torque around their hips, similar to how weight is distributed on a bicycle. 
Dogs, particularly older, arthritic ones, often suffer hip problems because if any two bones within the hip region lose their normal position, the abnormal areas can grind against each other with each step. 
Over time, abnormally shaped bone can grow and inflammation sets in. Since one condition fuels the other, it becomes a vicious cycle.
Usherwood hopes his model could help to clarify how this deadly cycle begins and worsens, which eventually may lead to improved diagnosis and treatment. 
Harvard University scientists have come to similar conclusions regarding the mechanics behind dog walking.
Russell Main, a Concord Field Station researcher, believes that dog legs work like two inverted pendulums, where mechanical energy is usually recovered with each stride. 
Dr David Lee and Professor Andy Biewener, also at Harvard, have already built a robot resembling a headless dog, called BigDog, that uses similar principles. 
According to Boston Dynamics, a research group involved in the project, BigDog so far has trotted at about 5 kilometres per hour, climbed a 35&deg; slope and carried about 54 kilograms.
In the future, the US military, which is helping to fund the research, hopes to use BigDog for rescue operations and other possible fieldwork.
