
Gigantic stromatolites in the 2.74 billion-year-old Tumbiana Formation in the Pilbara region of Western Australia. These indicate that oxygen-producing cyanobacteria were already flourishing in the Archaean era
There might have been more oxygen in the atmosphere billions of years ago than anyone thought, says an international team of scientists drilling in outback Australia.
The scientists say that their study of ancient rocks in the Pilbara region of Western Australia may force people to rethink accepted theories of how the prehistoric Earth's atmosphere developed.
They publish their results today in the journal Nature.
Up to now it has been generally accepted that the Earth's atmosphere was devoid of oxygen for some 80% of its existence. 
"The popular model is that there was little oxygen in the Earth's atmosphere before about 2.4 billion years ago," says lead author Professor Hiroshi Ohmoto of Pennsylvania State University.
But Ohmoto's team has cast doubt on the theory after finding sulfur isotopes, indicating prevalent oxygen, that predate the accepted start of atmospheric oxygenation. 
The key lies in the fact that while all isotopes of sulfur behave the same chemically, they have slightly differing masses according to the amount of atmospheric oxygen at the time. 
Isotopes from two sulfur samples the team analysed, one 2.76 billion years old from a lake bed and the other 2.92 billion years old from the sea bed, did not indicate an oxygen-starved atmosphere.
"We analysed the sulfur composition and could not find the abnormal sulfur isotope ratio [indicating no oxygen]," Ohmoto says.
"This is the first time that sediment that old was found to contain no abnormal sulfur isotope ratio."
The team concludes that there are several possible explanations.
Oxygen levels could have fluctuated wildly over the millennia, going from oxygenless before 3 billion years ago to oxygenated between 3 and 2.75 billion years ago, then back to oxygenless from 2.75 to 2.4 billion years ago.
Alternatively, the atmosphere could have contained oxygen as early as 3.8 billion years ago and that sulfur usually associated with no oxygen might have been produced at a time of violent volcanic activity.
Either way, the scientists say, the accepted theories about how the atmosphere evolved needs to be re-evaluated.
