
The new ground-based telescope will give images 10 times crisper than the Hubble Space Telescope
Australian astronomers have joined a consortium building the world's largest telescope, which from 2015 will help scientists understand the evolution of the universe.
The Australian National University has become equal partners with eight US institutions to design the US$500 million (A$671 million) optical and infrared Giant Magellan Telescope.
The new telescope is to be built in Chile and will consist of six mirrors surrounding a central mirror, with each mirror 8.4 metres across.
At an overall diameter of 21 metres, the new telescope will be the first of a generation of so-called Extremely Large Telescopes designed to probe the depths of the universe.
"The largest telescopes that astronomers have access to right now have diameters between 8 and 10 metres," says Professor Penny Sackett, director of the university's Research School of Astronomy and Astrophysics, based at Mount Stromlo in Canberra. 
"Extremely Large Telescopes have diameters of 20 to 30 to 50 metres."
Sackett says the light-gathering power increases with the square of the diameter of a telescope.
"When you go from an 8 metre to a 24 metre [telescope] you've actually increased your light-gathering power by a factor of nine not by a factor of three."
Light from distant stars
She says the telescope's enormous diameter will allow it to detect light from the most distant stars in the universe.
The light has taken so long to reach Earth it is almost the age of the universe which means it gives astronomers a picture of the universe right after it was born, says Sackett.
She says the Giant Magellan Telescope will be the first telescope to directly detect light from planets that are just forming around other stars.
The telescope will also allow astronomers to study dark matter and dark energy, which influence the geometry of the universe.
"Dark matter and dark energy are the forces that tug and pull on the fabric of space-time. They determine how the universe evolves over time," she says.
Clear focus
Sackett says the telescope will have "adaptive optics", new technology that undoes the blurring effects of the Earth's atmosphere. 
"The mirrors move very quickly to put the light rays back in the right place by bouncing them at slightly different angles," she says.
"The Giant Magellan Telescope should be able to take pictures that are 10 times crisper, 10 times sharper, 10 times more detailed that the Hubble Space Telescope."
Partnership in the new telescope will give Australian astronomers access to an Extremely Large Telescope, which, according to the decadal plan for astronomy, is one of the two items Australian astronomers say are the most important to their future a decade from now.
Sackett says that Australian industries and academic institutions could also benefit from contracts to design and build instruments for the new telescope.
Other members of the consortium are the Carnegie Institution of Washington, Harvard University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, University of Arizona, University of Michigan, Smithsonian Institution , University of Texas at Austin and Texas A&M University.
