
The last human chromosome to be sequenced, chromosome 1, is the biggest and contains the most genes
Scientists have reached a landmark point in one of the world's most important scientific projects by sequencing the last chromosome in the human genome.
Chromosome 1 contains nearly twice as many genes as the average chromosome and makes up 8% of the human genetic code.
It is packed with 3141 genes and linked to 350 illnesses including cancer, Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease, according to a report today in the journal Nature. 
"This achievement effectively closes the book on an important volume of the Human Genome Project," says Dr Simon Gregory who headed the sequencing project at the UK's Sanger Institute.
The project started in 1990 to identify the genes and DNA sequences that provide a blueprint for human beings.
Chromosome 1 is the biggest and contains, per chromosome, the greatest number of genes. 
"Therefore it is the region of the genome to which the greatest number of diseases have been localised," adds Gregory.
The sequence of chromosome 1 took an international team of 150 scientists 10 years to complete.
Researchers around the world will be able to mine the data to improve diagnostics and treatments for cancers, autism, mental disorders and other illnesses.  
Final chapter
The human genome has about 20,000 to 25,000 genes and the sequencing of chromosome 1 has led to the identification of more than 1000 new ones. 
 "We are moving into the next phase which will be working out what the genes do and how they interact," says Gregory.
The genetic map of chromosome 1 has already been used to identify a gene for a common form of cleft lip and palate. It will also improve understanding of what processes lead to genetic diversity in populations, Gregory says.
The scientists also identified 4500 new SNPs, single nucleotide polymorphisms, variations in human DNA that make people unique.
SNPs contain clues about why some people are susceptible to diseases like cancer or malaria, the best way to diagnose and treat them and how they will respond to drugs.
