
The telescope, a prototype of which is seen here, will use tiles to gather radio waves from the early universe
An innovative radio telescope made up of square tiles instead of conventional dish antennas will be built in outback Western Australia to study what switched on the first stars.
The Mileura Widefield Array, which will cover an area 1.5 kilometres in diameter, will use 500 six metre square 'tiles' to gather radio signals from its site in the mid-west of the state.
The array will operate at low frequencies to 'see through' the neutral hydrogen, which is opaque to optical light, that filled the early universe.
"Less than a billion years after the Big Bang something happened to ionise the neutral hydrogen so that the universe became transparent as it is today," says Dr Brian Boyle, director of CSIRO's Australia Telescope National Facility.
"The question is what? Was it massive stars, quasars, black holes?  We don't know. But by looking at the primordial constituents of the gas and how it has been ionised we will be able to derive some important limits." 
The array is being built by Australian and US partners as part of the preparation for the Square Kilometre Array (SKA), a huge international radio telescope scheduled for operation in 2020.
"The SKA will require a number of different front-end antennas to cover a wide frequency range," says Boyle, and the Mileura array will cover the low-frequency range.
Mileura, a uniquely radio-quiet area, is Australia's proposed base site for the SKA, which, if successful, will include antennas as far afield as New Zealand.
The Mileura array will operate at similar wavelengths used for FM radio and television. So, if it was built near a big city, signals would swamp radio signals from space.
Computer power
Computing power lies at the heart of the array, which will use modern digital signal processing and clever electronics to turn thousands of small, cheap, fixed dipole antennas into one of the most powerful astronomical instruments in the world.
The signals or data from each of the antennas can be combined in different ways, effectively allowing the telescope to 'point' in any direction although no moving parts are required.
Until recently, combining and analysing signals collected from multiple antennas, known as interferometry, took time as the recorded data had to be processed centrally.
With the Mileura array a supercomputer will process the data instantly, in real time.
CSIRO has invested A$20 million overall and the US National Science Foundation has awarded Massachusetts Institute of Technology US$4.9 million for the construction of the Mileura array which will begin in 2008.
Other Australian partners include a university consortium led by the University of Melbourne, which includes the Australian National University and Curtin University of Technology.
