
The return of a fragment of the Parthenon to Greece shouldn't set a precedent for the repatriation of other museum pieces, says the University of Heidelberg
The battle over fragments taken from Greece's Parthenon has resurfaced with the return of a small piece of the ancient monument by a German university.
The fragment consists of a foot, carved from marble, which was taken nearly 200 years ago from the northern frieze.
Greek officials hailed the fragment's recent return as an important step toward the return of other fragments of the 5th century BC building, many of which are kept at the British Museum in London.
The relief sculpture, which measures about 7 by 12 centimetres, had been held at the University of Heidelberg for more than 130 years and first appeared in the university's inventory in 1871.
It was probably taken as a souvenir by a German visitor to Greece. 
"This is a historic day. For the first time in almost 200 years, a precious piece of the Parthenon abroad is put in its original place," Greek culture minister Giorgos Voulgarakis said as the sculpture was handed over by the university's vice-rector Professor Angelos Chaniotis.
The University of Heidelberg says the decision to return the fragment was "guided by the scholarly aim of promoting the unification of the Parthenon as a unique monument of world culture".
Voulgarakis hails the repatriation of the small fragment not only as a highly symbolic act, but as an unprecedented move in favour of the reunification of Greece's artistic heritage.
"For the first time, the silent agreement among museums in possession of Parthenon sculptures has been broken," he says.
Archaeological artefacts scattered
The fearless horsemen, sprightly youths, lounging deities, belligerent centaurs and expressive horses carved by Phidias in the 5th century BC are scattered throughout several European museums, including the Louvre in Paris. But the bulk of the marbles are kept in London's British Museum.
Greece contends that the 17 figures and 56 panels on display there were stolen in 1801 by Lord Elgin, British ambassador to the Ottoman Empire. The works have since become known as the Elgin marbles.
Britain says that Lord Elgin had permission from the ruling Turkish authorities to take them.
The British also contend that the marbles have received better treatment at the British Museum, where they are safe from the polluted Athens air, which has damaged other Greek treasures.
Voulgarakis remarks that a space in the new Acropolis museum, which is due to be completed next year, has been reserved for the Parthenon sculptures.
"The demand for unification of the Parthenon sculptures originates exclusively by moral reasons and not by a nationalistic obsession," he says.
A precedent?
The University of Heidelberg stresses that the transfer of the fragment is "a special case that should not be used as a precedent for other monuments and works of art".
But the German gesture is likely to cause controversy among museums worldwide.
In 2002, when negotiations were under way to return a Parthenon fragment held at the Salinas Regional Archaeological Museum in Palermo, Sicily, directors of several major museums around the world deplored the move, saying that it could destabilise the entire museum system.
