
Could hydrogen sulfide gas from the river have killed Dr Bogle and Mrs Chandler?
New evidence may support the idea that 'rotten egg gas' from a polluted river was to blame for two of the most mysterious deaths in Australian history.
Evidence aired in an ABC TV documentary this week suggests a concentrated cloud of hydrogen sulfide killed physicist Dr Gilbert Bogle and Mrs Margaret Chandler.
But some toxicologists remain sceptical that the gas was behind the deaths of the two lovers, whose bodies were found by the banks of Sydney's Lane Cover River in 1963.
At the time some suspected they were killed by a rapidly acting poison.
Yet the investigation, which included help from the FBI and New Scotland Yard, could find no cause of death, motive or killer.
Many suspected Margaret Chandler's husband Geoffrey. But the documentary Who killed Dr Bogle and Mrs Chandler? resurrects the hydrogen sulfide theory, a notion first discounted by police investigators in 1971.
According to the theory, hydrogen sulfide bubbling up from the river mud in the still early morning air had became trapped in a hollow where the lovers lay in embrace.
The gas had come mainly from industrial waste that had been dumped into the river over the past 60 years, and hydrogen sulfide from sewage in the river.
US forensic toxicologist Dr Thomas Milby told the film-maker that hydrogen sulfide gas can be fatal in high doses and his reading of the autopsy reports convinced him the gas was the culprit.
"The probabilities were [that] it was an inhaled gas, as opposed to a pill or something like that," he says.
Milby also commented on analyses of blood samples taken from the two victims during the investigations. These found a bluish tinge in both samples, which he says supports the hydrogen sulfide theory.
"I saw nothing in either report that would, in my opinion, exclude the possibility of hydrogen sulfide as being the culprit that killed them."
Sceptical
But at least two Australian experts are not so sure about the theory.
"As a healthy sceptic I'd say 'interesting theory' but why didn't they smell [the gas]? Because it's pretty disgusting," says forensic pathologist Dr Christopher Lawrence who is with the Tasmanian health department.
"Also, were the tests taken in a way that you could rely on the results?"
He says while hydrogen sulfide could discolour the blood by interacting with haemoglobin any blood tests would needed to have been carried out very shortly after the deaths.
