
Wheatgrass contains high levels of phytonutrients, which are believed to have antioxidant qualities
Wheatgrass juice may not be quite the tonic that many people think, according to a review that finds little evidence for many of its health claims.
The review, published in the Australian Consumers' Association Choice magazine, concludes that while wheatgrass has some nutritional value, it's no miracle drink.
The review found only "limited supporting evidence" for claims of the anti-inflammatory and wound-healing properties of wheatgrass and little confirmation for claims it builds red blood cells and improves circulation and tissue oxygenation.
Wheatgrass juice is made of the pulped shoots of grasses from the genus Agropyron, is a relative of wheat and has become a staple of juice bars.
Marketers and enthusiasts say the benefits of this dark green juice range from purifying blood to preventing cancer and making your faeces less smelly.
"It's certainly not bad for you, but the claims that are made are perhaps a lot of hype without any real evidence," says Viola Korczak, health policy officer at the Australian Consumers' Association.
She says larger, controlled clinical trials are needed.
What the research says
Choice reviewed the available scientific research on wheatgrass juice, including botanical studies, animal studies and a dozen small human trials.
It found there are more vitamins and minerals, including calcium, vitamin C and folic acid, in 30 grams of cooked spinach, broccoli or a garden salad than in a shot of wheatgrass juice.
Some reports link wheatgrass to improvements in eczema, fractures, burns, osteoarthritis and skin cancer, but it is unclear whether wheatgrass is directly responsible, the review says. 
Other studies report that the green pigment chlorophyll, which makes up 70% of wheatgrass juice, shares molecular similarities with haemoglobin. But this doesn't mean it enhances red blood cell production.
"As far as evidence goes, there's little to be found," the report concludes.
A study of 16 patients with the blood disorder beta thalassaemia found wheatgrass juice reduced transfusions in half but not the other half.
Meanwhile, experiments in labs and on animals showed wheatgrass may work against genetic mutations, Choice says, largely because of the antioxidant activity of some of its compounds, such as flavonoids.
But there's no evidence for humans and "there's nothing to substantiate claims that wheatgrass can help dissolve tumours", the report says.
Too early to write off wheatgrass juice
Professor Marc Cohen, president of the Australasian Integrative Medicine Association and head of complementary medicine at RMIT University, says it's too early to write off wheatgrass juice
He says it's a minimally processed wholefood with high levels of phytochemicals, which play a role in growth signalling in plants and are associated with reduced blood pressure, reduced cholesterol and cancer prevention in humans.
"You want to be eating wholefoods so you get as many phytonutrients as possible," he says.
Dr Peter Clifton, head of CSIRO's nutrition clinic, says wheatgrass is "very trendy ... but it probably isn't any different from any other type of grass".
He says it may have more polyphenolics, a type of phytochemical, because it is an actively growing plant.
This may account for one studying showing 100 millilitres of wheatgrass a day over a month reduced symptoms of ulcerative colitis, he says.
He says claims about the health benefits of wheatgrass have been around for decades but the evidence is still lacking.
"I guess the wheatgrass juice industry should put its money where its mouth is and test the level of polyphenolics," he says.
