
This footprint was made by a two-legged dinosaur that walked along a sandy beach 165 million years ago
Scientists studying how emus walk have brought to life the mysterious moves of two-footed Jurassic dinosaurs travelling along a long-lost beach.
Computer models have been developed to simulate the gait, and therefore the possible tracks, of specific dinosaurs.
But live emus allow scientists to directly compare complex tracks to specific behaviours, say researchers looking at the thousands of tracks left behind 165 million years ago by dinosaurs at Red Gulch in northern Wyoming.
Among the surprises they've found is that tracks once interpreted as steady walking may actually be created by the animals stopping at mid-stride.
Another enigmatic type of track that now makes sense is where the dinosaurs appear to have crossed one leg over the other.
The motion is a seemingly weird thing to do, until you watch an emu making the same sort of track, says Brent Breithaupt, director and curator of the University of Wyoming's Geological Museum.
Emus, it turns out, have legs that are close together, like many dinosaurs, and tend to look around a lot as they walk, Breithaupt says.
This scanning behaviour causes emus to often cross the left foot over the right leg and the right foot over the left, making the same confusing pattern seen in the dinosaur tracks.
"Sure enough there are wonderful comparisons," says Breithaupt. "Emus are our biological Rosetta Stone."
He presented the latest on emus as proxies for dinosaurs at the recent Geological Society of America in Philadelphia.
The search for a modern animal to act as a proxy for dinosaur tracks started, says Breithaupt, because he was getting a little impatient with all the speculation about the tracks.
There was too much of what he calls "prehistoric hyperbole".
So after passing on ostriches, which have only two toes, and rheas, which have three-toes but overly rambunctious personalities, emus were the best alternative. Plus there was an emu ranch just across the state line in Colorado.
Breithaupt and his team now think that the Red Gulch dinosaurs were probably human-sized meat eaters, or theropods, travelling along in groups.
The groups may have included families, since there are juvenile and adults tracks together, implying some sort of parental care.
Exactly what the dinosaurs looked like, however, is a mystery because the mid-Jurassic Period is particularly poor in dinosaur fossils in North America.
"There is virtually nothing known about dinosaurs in North America from that time," says geologist Dr Erik Kvale, who discovered the tracks and did a great deal of the first geological work there.
"Chances are there were some very gregarious behaviours of dinosaurs [at Red Gulch], but it's only a snapshot."
What can be said with more certainty is that the dinosaurs were walking in a very different landscape than today, says Kvale.
The sands beneath their feet were carbonate sands like those found in the Bahamas or the Florida Keys, but the climate of the ancient shoreline was probably a lot drier.
"The Persian Gulf is a better analogue," says Kvale.
