
It might be a prehistoric phenomenon but human destruction of wetlands has been faster in the last 300 years, the researchers say
Human damage to coastal ecology is not a recent phenomenon, say an international team of scientists: it's been happening since the dawn of civilization.
Whether they settled along the coasts of North America, Europe or Australia, humans have always been reducing the biodiversity of estuaries and coastal seas, say researchers publishing in today's issue of the journal Science.
"This isn't a blame game," says Roger Bradbury, an adjunct professor at the Australian National University and co-author of the paper.
"People in the 20th century haven't started to do this - we've just built on what our ancestors have done."
The upshot has been a depletion of more than 90% of formerly important species, destruction of more than 65% of sea grass and wetlands, and degradation of water quality, the scientists say.
The team used detailed information from 12 different estuary and coastal ecosystems across the globe to build a picture of what they would have looked like before humans arrived on the scene.
Using mathematical models, they created a timeline for the changes that would have taken place in the numbers of different plants and animals.
These models revealed that all 12 different ecosystems would have undergone the same general trajectory of change - a long period of slow decline followed by 150 to 300 years of rapid degeneration.
"It's just the quickening of economic growth and development," says Bradbury. 
"Everything's quickened up - the population has grown and we cycle through things faster now. Plus we have greater control over the world than our ancestors."
By depleting the living creatures in estuaries, we've also had an impact on physical aspects of the ecosystems, the scientists say. 
Recent disasters like the 2004 Asian tsunami and last year's hurricane Katrina were made worse by the loss of mangroves and wetlands, they say.
"The whole thing about estuaries is that you're at the interface between sea and land," Bradbury says. 
"When you tamper with the living things, you have an impact on physical structures."
On a positive note, the scientists report that conservation efforts in the 20th century have had some impact. 
They led to a partial recovery for 12% of species, and a substantial recovery in 2% of
species, particularly for animals like seals, otters, birds and crocodiles.
"Things are grim in many estuaries around the world, but we know enough now to turn things around," Bradbury says. "If we start now, we have a reasonable chance of restoring them."
"This isn't magic," he adds. "It's hard work."
