
Metamaterials could create the ultimate optical illusion: invisibility - although it wouldn't quite look like this
New materials that can change the way light and other forms of radiation bend around an object may provide a way to make things invisible, say researchers.
Two separate teams of researchers report in today's issue the journal Science that experimental "metamaterials" could be used to hide an object from visible light, infrared light, microwaves and perhaps even sonar probes.
Their work suggests that science-fiction portrayals of invisibility, such as the cloaking devices used to hide space ships in Star Trek, might be truly possible. 
Harry Potter's cloak or The Invisible Man of films and fiction might be a bit harder to emulate, however, because the thing to be made invisible will have to be encased in a thick shell of metamaterials.
Metamaterials are composite structures that deliberately resemble nothing found in nature. 
They are engineered to have unusual properties, such as the ability to bend light in unique ways. 
"The [metamaterial] cloak would act like you've opened up a hole in space," says Dr David R. Smith, a professor of electrical and computer engineering at Duke University in North Carolina and co-author of one of the papers in Science.
"All light or other electromagnetic waves are swept around the area, guided by the metamaterial to emerge on the other side as if they had passed through an empty volume of space."
Unlike modern "stealth" bombers that bounce radar off their surfaces so they cannot be seen, an object could be encased in a shell of metamaterials.
"[It] would create an illusion akin to a mirage," says co-author Dr David Schurig, also of Duke University. 
Like all physics, the invisibility idea requires a little imagination. 
"Think of space as a woven cloth," says Shurig. 
"Imagine making a hole in the cloth by inserting a pointed object between the threads without tearing them." 
The light, or microwaves, or radar would travel along the threads of the cloth, ending up behind the object without having touched it. 
"You just need the right set of material properties and you can guide light," Shurig says. 
Defence project
The Duke University researchers started working on metamaterials with a grant from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). 
Such materials could provide super-light electronics in aircraft or cars, or highly efficient lenses. 
The researchers came up with the idea of using these materials to bend light and other electromagnetic radiation. 
"We are going to try to have an experimental demonstration of these effects. There are a few more steps to go. We are working on these steps," says Smith.
Shurig says anyone making such a cloak would have to choose what form of radiation one wanted invisibility from. 
Also, the invisibility would work both ways - a person hidden from the visible light spectrum would have to use infrared or sonar or microwaves to see out, he says. 
"If want to cover the whole visible spectrum that would a tall order," says Shurig.      
A second paper in Science, by UK-based professor of theoretical physics, Dr Ulf Leonhardt at the University of St Andrews, also proposes an invisibility device using metamaterials.
