
The vote represents a major victory for pro-whaling nations led by Japan, who want to turn the IWC away from pure conservation and focus on a return to managing whale stocks for hunting. 
The moratorium, enforced since 1986, still stands because it needs a 75&nbsp;% majority to be overturned.
Japan abides by the moratorium, but conducts "research" whaling through what opponents say is a loophole in the IWC charter, as does Iceland.
Norway ignores the moratorium all together. 
Around 2,000 whales are taken by the three nations each year and more than    25,000 whales have been hunted and killed since the moratorium. 
Japan hopes to use the resolution, known as the St Kitts and Nevis declaration, as a political weapon to argue that more states than not on the 70-nation IWC body believe the commercial whaling ban should be lifted.
Japan complains that anti-whaling states have deadlocked the commission, which was set up in 1946 to prevent whales from passing into extinction through over-hunting.
Having a majority on the IWC will allow Tokyo to control the commission's agenda for the first time since a moratorium was introduced and, environmentalists fear, let Tokyo frustrate conservation efforts.
Not all good news for whaling nations
Sue Lieberman, director of the global species program at WWF International, says the vote should be a wake-up call.
"What is more important than that is this does show that Japan's recruitment drive has finally succeeded," she says.
But Lieberman says Japan was defeated in three far more substantial votes that preceded approval of the St Kitts and Nevis declaration.
In one, Japan sought to remove the issue of hunting dolphins and porpoises from the agenda of the meeting but failed by a 32-30 vote.
In another, Japan lost its bid to introduce secret ballots, something the group has never done for major initiatives in its 60-year history, officials say.
And in a third, anti-whaling nations voted down Tokyo's request for coastal whalers to resume a small for-profit inshore Minke whale hunt. 
"No they did not win when it really counted. And no, this isn't going to change anything," Lieberman says of the declaration.
"This is purely inflammatory and will not help resolve what we agree is a serious impasse (in the IWC)."
