
But it's still not clear how this research relates to brain development in humans
Ultrasound disrupts the brain development of unborn mice, US researchers say in a study that adds to growing evidence that too many scans could also affect human foetuses.
Prolonged ultrasound scans of the brains of foetal mice interfered with a process known as neuronal migration in which neurones move from one place to another, the team at Yale University reports. 
"Proper migration of neurones during development is essential for normal development of the cerebral cortex and its function," says Dr Pasko Rakic, chair of the Department of Neurobiology at Yale.
"We have observed that a small but significant number of neurones in the mouse embryonic brain do not migrate to their proper positions in the cerebral cortex following prolonged and frequent exposure to ultrasound." 
Writing in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Rakic's team says the findings do not necessarily mean that ultrasound of human foetuses is dangerous.
But the researchers say doctors and pregnant women should probably keep the scans to a minimum.
The pros and cons
Ultrasound scans give parents a peek at the unborn child and doctors a chance to see if there are any serious defects that might be corrected before or right at birth.
But several studies suggest that ultrasound may affect the developing brain, not necessarily adversely.
For instance, a 1993 study published in The Lancet journal found that foetuses exposed to ultrasound in the womb were more likely to be left-handed.
A separate study found a possible decrease in weight in newborns who were scanned, while a third found delayed speech. 
But another study showed that children who had received ultrasound exams before birth actually did better on language tests when they were older, says Dr Verne Caviness of Massachusetts General Hospital.
More study is clearly needed, Rakic says.
"We do not have any evidence ourselves that ultrasound waves cause behavioural effects in mice or have any effect on the developing human brain," he says.
"Therefore I want to emphasise that our study in mice does not mean that use of ultrasound on human foetuses for appropriate diagnostic and medical purposes should be abandoned.
"On the contrary. Ultrasound has been shown to be very beneficial in the medical context," Rakic adds. 
He says the study suggests that pregnant women should not get multiple ultrasound scans for fun or out of curiosity.
The mouse study
For their study, Rakic and colleagues did scans of pregnant mice on the 16th day of gestation. 
This is the last week of gestation and a time when, in mice, neurones move to a new position in the brain.
After prolonged, multiple scans, some of these cells went to the wrong place. 
"Does this study indicate that we should be concerned about human foetal ultrasound?" Caviness asks in a commentary published in the same journal. 
He says the implications are not known and notes a human foetus has a much larger and denser brain, and that scans usually just pass over the brain for a few seconds. 
"The corresponding neurones in the human brain would probably be formed in the 16th week and continue to migrate for at least 1-2 weeks," Caviness writes.
No one knows how sound waves might disturb a developing foetus or embryo, both Caviness and Rakic say.
