
Planemos, short for planetary mass objects, are a cross between a star and a planet. Astronomers compare them with a brown dwarf, seen here surrounded by a swirling mass of planet-forming dust and gas
Too lightweight to be stars but bigger than most planets, a handful of hot young free-floating objects have the raw materials to make their own mini-planetary systems, astronomers say.
These so-called planemos have discs of cosmic dust and gas circling them, just like some young stars.
These kinds of discs contain the ingredients for planets; astronomers believe Earth and the other planets in our solar system were forged from such a disc. 
But planemos, short for planetary mass objects, are unlike normal planets because they do not orbit stars, says Associate Professor Ray Jayawardhana of the University of Toronto.
He and other researchers present their findings at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Calgary, Canada.
"These things are not orbiting a star. They're by themselves," Jayawardhana says.
The researchers detected four newborn planemos, just a few million years old, in a star-forming region about 450 light-years from Earth, a relative stone's throw in cosmic terms.
A light-year is about 10 trillion kilometres, the distance light travels in a year. 
All four of these objects had dust discs around them, the astronomers report. 
Scientists also found a disc-skirted planemo interacting with a brown dwarf, a failed star, even closer to Earth, just 170 light-years away. 
Such a planet-sized object might have been expected to be pulled into orbit around the brown dwarf, but instead the two revolve around each other, and both have the makings for more satellites. 
An eternal freeze
These objects, with several times the mass of the giant planet Jupiter but 100 times less massive than our Sun, are cosmic infants only a few million years old.
Even Jupiter had a disc when it was young, and its dozens of moons were formed from the dust and gas it contained.
But Earth's rocky moon was probably born when our world collided with another heavenly body early on, and Mars' moons were asteroids captured by the planet's gravity. 
Planemos are a relatively new player on the cosmic scene, filling the gap between the least massive stars and the most massive planets, Jayawardhana says. 
"These are the lowest-mass brown dwarfs or really big giant planets, especially when they're young," he says. 
When young, planemos are still warmed by the heat of formation and are more like stars, he says. But as they age, these planet-esque objects shrink and cool. 
Other researchers do not use the term 'planet' to describe any satellites that might be formed around a planemo, referring to these as moons or moonlets. 
If such bodies do form, they would be inhospitable to Earth-type life. If a satellite formed very close to a young planemo, it might be temporarily warm enough for liquid water to exist.
But Jayawardhana acknowledges that in the long run, life would have dim prospects.
"Any kind of planet that forms around them is committed to an eternal freeze," he says.
