
The Mona Lisa has inspired many imitations, like this poster advertising contact lenses
Hidden behind the Mona Lisa's enigmatic smile are millions of invisible dots, research shows.
According to research presented recently at Italy's Uffizi Gallery in Florence, the Mona Lisa consists of countless of dot layers applied with a technique of microdivided brushstrokes. 
The dot research was revealed at the exhibition "The mind of Leonardo - the universal genius at work", which runs at the gallery until January 2007.
Jacques Franck, a consultant at the Armand Hammer Center for Leonardo Studies at the University of California, Los Angeles, says the technique is somewhat similar to pointillism used by the French neo-impressionists in the late 19th century. 
"Examples of this microdivision of tones exist since the ancient Romans. Leonardo took an existing techniques, but used it to the extreme, like nobody else," says Franck.
The painting technique is called 'sfumato', from the Italian word 'fumo', meaning smoke. And it produces an almost 3D effect, the result of the delicate brushwork that blends light, shadow, and contours.
Da Vinci never really explained how he was able to blend shadow and light in such an imperceptible way. 
The only reference to the sfumato technique appears in his notes on the painting.
"Light and shade should blend without lines or borders, in the manner of smoke," he wrote.
Applying science
Franck examined Leonardo's works using what he calls an "archaeological approach".
He took a close look at another da Vinci work, 'Drapery study for a seated figure', which hangs in The Louvre, and noticed that Leonardo used minute brushstrokes to produce the 3D effect of the draperies. 
"The technique is visible, as he used tempera [a type of emulsion of oil and water, often using egg]. On the contrary, in oil painting traces would have been masked by a delicate velatura or glaze," Franck says. 
Franck, an artist himself, has been copying Leonardo's works since he was eight.
And Franck backed up his microdivision theory by reconstructing the Mona Lisa's eye through six steps, represented by panels on display at the Uffizi exhibition. 
He started with a poplar panel, similar to the one Leonardo used to paint the Mona Lisa in 1503-1506. 
Franck treated the panel with gypsum and animal glue, then painted an eye with a brush, but using black chalk.
Then he applied a semi-opaque, diluted oil-based wash to soften the chalk lines and then retouched the details with microscopic brushstrokes.
He had to apply many layers until they blended together. 
According to Franck, details such as the smile and eyes contain between 30 and 40 brush strokes per millimetre. Essentially, Leonardo was working as a miniaturist would.
"He may have made one square millimetre a day. This means it might have taken Leonardo about 10 years to complete the Mona Lisa," Franck says.
Enigmatic smile
Lisa di Antonio Maria Gherardini, the Mona Lisa, has been fascinating art lovers since her portrait was completed toward the end of the life of Leonardo, who lived from 1452-1519. 
Attempts to solve the enigma around her smile, described by the 16th century artist and writer Giorgio Vasari as "more divine than human", have included theories that the noblewoman was happily pregnant, suffering from asthma, had facial paralysis or that the smile was the result of a compulsive gnashing of teeth.
Franck's theory is raising a debate among art historians.
"I find it absolutely untrue. Leonardo did use the sfumato, but his painting technique is also very firm. I have seen the Mona Lisa under a magnifying glass and really, I could not see any dot," says da Vinci scholar and UK professor of art history Martin Kemp, from the University of Oxford.
Franck argues that it is scientifically impossible to distinguish the dots with a magnifying glass. 
"Light penetrates each dot, producing reflection, diffraction, and diffusion. Thus, when you look at the painting, the surface appears homogeneous. No dot can be seen. Moreover, in my works the dots completely disappeared within three years. The same might have happened with the Mona Lisa," Franck says.
How about x-ray evidence? 
Indeed, x-ray images of Franck's copies are very similar to x-ray pictures of the master's works: they all show something similar to smoke. 
"The layers of paint are so thin that x-ray simply goes through," Franck says. 
According to the curators of the exhibition, Franck's hypothesis is "convincing". 
"It is compatible with the material evidence of the Mona Lisa as analysed by the Louvre's laboratory," they write in the exhibition catalogue.
