
As long as water is good enough to drink, researchers say it's good enough to clean uninfected wounds
Medical workers in disaster areas no longer have to wait for sterile equipment before they clean and dress wounds, thanks to Australian research.
Professor Rhonda Griffiths, of the University of Western Sydney's Centre for Applied Nursing, says as long as water is good enough to drink, evidence suggests it will be good enough to clean uninfected wounds.
"We've demonstrated that some of the traditional ways of doing dressings are unnecessarily expensive and labour intensive," says Griffiths.
She adds that if there is any doubt that the tap water is suitable for drinking, it can be boiled before use.
Griffiths and colleagues recently completed a systematic review of evidence for the Cochrane Collaboration comparing the use of saline versus tap water to clean uninfected wounds. 
The review found that washing wounds, including leg ulcers, with water did not show an increase in infection or decrease in healing time, compared to using saline, she says.
As a result, the Cochrane Collaboration is now recommending tap water is used to clean wounds in developing countries and disaster zones, says Griffiths.
In the community
Community nurses, who treat people at home, first triggered the investigation into the use of tap water to clean wounds, says Griffiths.
While hospitals routinely use saline or sterilised water to clean uninfected wounds, community nurses have traditionally relied on people to simply shower before they dress their wounds.
"So in hospitals you had one practice," says Griffiths. "And the community had another."
Both practices were based on tradition rather than evidence, she says.
One of the studies included in Griffiths' Cochrane review was carried out by her team.
It was a six-week double blind, randomised controlled trial in southwestern Sydney that studied the healing and infection rate in 49 wounds of 35 patients washed with saline, compared with equivalent patients who were washed with tap water.
"We found that there was no difference," she says.
"That tells us that if you have got clean tap water that you can drink, it is perfectly safe to wash wounds with that tap water if those wounds aren't infected."
Griffith says the research is changing the way we think about managing some types of wounds.
"It's the cleanliness rather than the sterility [that's important]," she says.
Better for patients and cheaper
Griffiths says washing wounds with tap water would save money in hospitals, especially the cost of the disposable sterile equipment that is required when using saline.
Patients also prefer washing with water, she says, because they can get out of bed and take a shower.
While tap water may be safe and effective, Griffiths still wants to confirm the findings and find out if saline offers any advantages by carrying out a much larger randomised controlled trial.
She has applied for funding from the National Health and Medical Research Council to carry out a trial involving 400 wounds.
