
You want me to do what?
People whose cheeks turn red at the thought of speaking to a stranger have similar blood flow to everyone else.
It's just that their blushing takes longer to subside so it's more obvious to them and others, Australian research suggests.
A team of researchers led by Professor Peter Drummond from Murdoch University in Western Australia rated facial blood flow in people frightened of blushing as they performed everyday, but potentially squirm-worthy tasks.
These included speaking to a stranger, giving a speech and listening to the taped speech afterwards.
The researchers then compared the results with a group of people who weren't frightened of blushing who performed the same tasks.
They found embarrassment and self-reported blushing intensity was greater in the fear-of-blushing group than in the control group throughout the experiment.
While increases in facial blood flow were similar in the two groups during each task, blushing took longer to subside in the fear-of-blushing group than in controls.
The researchers report online in the journal Behaviour Research and Therapy how this resulted in an incremental increase in facial blood flow over the course of the experiment.
Drummond says the differences in blushing behaviour could come down to a number of factors. 
"It may be that there is a difference in the way the facial blood vessels respond during social encounters [in fearful blushers] which prolongs the increase in facial blood flow; or a difference in the way people cope in slightly stressful situations," he says. 
"Or it may be that people who are frightened of blushing are simply more anxious than those who aren't, and this anxiety then persists for some time afterwards, so it takes them a little longer to recover and get back to normal."
It may also be that because the blush response lingers longer there's more opportunity for the person and others to notice it, he says.
What can you do about it?
Either way, Drummond says the research has its silver lining for people worried about blushing.
"During these social encounters they are blushing no more strongly or more frequently ... than people who don't feel they blush very much. They just take longer to recover."
And that, according to Drummond, could simply be the result of the blusher's thought process.
"[They're] going over all the possible ways that they could have embarrassed themselves during the social encounter," he says.
If the research helps people come to terms with that it could help them lose their fear of blushing, he says.
