
Nanotechnology involves manipulating matter at the atomic or molecular level
A nine-point plan for the responsible development of nanotechnology in Australia has been recommended in a new report. But environmental and worker safety groups are still not happy.
The industry minister Ian Macfarlane this week released the report, which he will consider when establishing a national nanotechnology strategy.
It recommends the establishment of a dedicated office within a federal department that will be responsible for the nanotechnology strategy, although it does not recommend which portfolio this should fall under.
The report states that there is no case for establishing new, nanotechnology-specific regulations to protect human health and the environment, but suggests existing regulations may need adjusting.
The Options for a National Nanotechnology Strategy report also recommends further research into the health, safety and environmental implications of nanotechnology.
And it recommends that any proposed changes to regulatory frameworks should "not add unnecessary regulatory burden to industry".
Nanoparticle risk
Australian Council of Trade Unions occupational health and safety officer, Steve Mullins, supports the establishment of a specific office to oversee nanotechnology.
But he criticises the report's failure to recommend the establishment of new regulations specific to nanotechnology.
"It seems like business has the green light to use nanotechnology but they've got a red light on health and safety regulation," he says.
The unions are particularly concerned about the exposure of workers to nanoparticles and believe precautionary measures should be taken to ensure this is minimised.
"By all means, continue research," says Mullins. "But we've got enough evidence to suggest nanoparticles can have a toxic effect on the body."
Georgia Miller of the Friends of the Earth's nanotechnology project also criticises the report.
She says it fails to require safety testing of nanoparticles before they are commercialised, as recommended by the UK's Royal Society in 2004.
She says there should be a moratorium on r&d and manufacture on nanotechnology until safety issues are resolved.
