
Pigs are the most important domestic animal of the Pacific
Sacred pigs from Vanuatu are shedding new light on how domestic pigs spread throughout the world, say US and Australian researchers.
Dr Koji Lum, from Binghamton University in New York State, and colleagues publish their study on Pacific island pigs in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
Pigs are the most important domestic animal in Pacific cultures, being an important source of food and a basis for societal wealth.
They are also sacred animals that some cultures believe have souls.
Yet the origin of Pacific pig breeds has long been unresolved.
Lum and team studied mitochondrial DNA, or mtDNA, from two kinds of sacred pigs from the island nation of Vanuatu.
One was a male of the Narave type. These intersex pigs don't produce enough steroid for complete masculinsation, say the researchers. So they cannot reproduce amongst themselves.
The breed is therefore carried forward by female carriers of the Navare traits.
The second type of sacred pig was the hairless Kapia.
Lum and team, which includes Kirk Huffman from the Australian Museum, compared mtDNA of the pigs from Vanuatu to mtDNA from pigs from Burma, Vietnam, China and the Ryukyu Islands.
They found that the Narave pig DNA matched the DNA of those breeds domesticated in southeast Asia over 3000 years ago.
"[This data suggests the Navare] pigs were recently domesticated within southeast Asia and dispersed during the human colonisation of remote Oceania associated with the Lapita cultural complex," write the researchers.
Interestingly, the researchers found that the other native Pacific pig they studied, Kapia, shared much of its DNA with introduced European breeds.
Two thirds of the DNA from the Kapia pig samples came from Berkshire and Large Black breeds introduced by Europeans.
The researchers say these breeds would have been chosen for crossing with native breeds because they had the same dark coat as the natives, ensuring the offspring remained protected from the tropical sun.
'Nice, but only half the story'
A previous study comparing pig skulls, by Professor Colin Groves of the Australian National University, also concluded southeast Asia was the most likely origin of Pacific pigs.
"[The Lum study is] a nice little confirmation of what we already suspected," says Groves.
But he says using mtDNA, which comes through the maternal line, means the researchers are only finding out the origin of the female pigs.
"They're only getting half the story here," he says.
Groves says if they tested the DNA from the Y chromosome of the Kapia, for example, they may find the main source of the recently introduced pig DNA was via the use of introduced boars rather than sows.
Groves says that while most of the domestic pigs that are widespread in the world today come from Europe, they are actually ultimately of either Chinese origin or half Chinese and half European.
He says European farmers bred their pigs with the fatter Chinese breeds to get a better domestic animal.
