
Scientists may have underestimated how long it takes for CFCs to reach Antarctica's stratosphere and how long they stay there
Despite widespread international reductions in ozone destroying chemicals, the Antarctic ozone hole will probably continue its annual appearance for another 60 years, say atmospheric scientists, 20 years longer than previous estimates.
A new model that analyses the effects of ozone gobbling chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) emissions predicts a return to pre-1980 stratospheric ozone levels over the southern continent in 2068.
What's more, no meaningful shrinking of the ozone hole should be expected before 2024, say US researchers from NASA, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and the National Center for Atmospheric Research in a recent issue of Geophysical Research Letters.
"The [previous] models underestimated the amount of chlorine and bromine over Antarctica," says NASA atmospheric scientist Dr Paul Newman, referring to the two elements that tear ozone apart. "That's why we underestimated the recovery rate."
One reason for earlier miscalculation is that CFC quantities over Antarctica were originally measured indirectly, by how much ozone destruction they caused. 
But when far more chlorine and bromine is present than needed to destroy all the ozone over Antarctica, it's difficult to predict the consequence of such a surplus.
Saturated with chlorine
In the 1990s the stratosphere over Antarctica saw the first of this sort of "saturation effect", says Newman, with 100% ozone destruction and plenty of chlorine and bromine to spare.
There can be no significant change in ozone destruction until the levels of harmful chemicals at least drop below the saturation level. The new model estimates that will happen by 2018, with a detectable reduction in ozone destruction by 2024.
"Now we understand how the models were wrong," Newman says.
Another change to the model comes from new information on how long it takes chlorine-containing CFCs to reach the Antarctic stratosphere and how long they linger, says atmospheric researcher Dr John Austin of NOAA's Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory and the UK's Met Office.
"Over the last few years we've realised that it takes a lot longer for the chlorofluorocarbons to be taken out of the atmosphere," says Austin. The longer they linger, the slower the ozone recovers.
Yet another concern that has been raised in recent months is that the amounts of CFCs still being emitted hasn't dropped off as quickly as expected. That could possibly add more delays to ozone recovery at both poles.
"In principle you could have another delay of another couple of decades," says Austin. "You keep adding more and more delays and you're starting to look at another 30 years. That's a problem."
