
But the impact of racist stereotypes on gamers can be hard to measure, say some critics
Some popular video games promote racist, negative stereotypes of Asians that would be unacceptable in other forms of media, says a Canadian researcher. 
Robert Parungao, who studied the topic as part of his honours degree in sociology at the University of British Columbia, looked at four best-selling games: Kung Fu, Warcraft 3, Shadow Warrior and Grand Theft Auto 3.
Parungao, an avid gamer, says the games feature evil gangsters, all of them non-white, who "function as narrative obstacles to be overcome, mastered or ultimately blown to smithereens by the white hero". 
He says while blatant racism is not tolerated in mainstream films or television, in video games "it's below the radar". 
Parungao says his study has had a mixed response. 
"Some say [racist stereotypes in games] is terrible," he says. "Other people in the games community say, 'Lighten up, it's a game, you don't have to worry about political correctness.'" 
A fifth-generation Canadian of Chinese and Filipino ancestry, Parungao says that with video game sales at about US$30 billion worldwide, making them more popular than movies, negative stereotypes matter. 
He admits that not all games, or game publishing companies, promote such stereotypes, but says racism is rife among many of the most popular games, which are designed and published mostly in the US and Japan. 
"These aren't just kids' toys, these are representative of our society and they teach us," he says. 
Parungao's study is one of the first to look at racism in video games, says Associate Professor Richard Smith, a specialist in technology and society at Simon Fraser University in Vancouver. 
"We've heard about sex and violence, but I can't remember hearing about racism in video games," says Smith.
"The most insidious thing about racism is when people accept it. Studies like this help create consciousness." 
But Smith cautioned there's no academic consensus that violence and sexism in media affects real-world attitudes, and says the impact of racist images will be hard to measure. 
"This is new territory," says Smith.
