
Could the hobbit really be one of us after all?
A new paper has inflamed the debate over the hobbit's origins, with one researcher criticising the scientific journal that published the research.
A paper in today's issue of the Proceedings of the National Academy of Science (PNAS) is the second this year to conclude that the hobbit is just a sick human.
Indonesian researcher Professor Teuku Jacob, from Gadjah Mada University, and an international team argue that the hobbit is a microcephalic pygmy rather than a new species of hominid.
"All the odd things about it aren't things which indicate another species," says co-author and anatomist Dr Alan Thorne, a visiting fellow at the Australian National University.
"It happens to be an individual [human] with major, probably genetic, deformities."
Thorne says the team reached its conclusions by comparing 140 anatomical features of the hobbit specimens with those of human specimens.
He says none of these features were outside the normal range for humans, in particular Australomelanesians, which is his research speciality.
Thorne says previous comparisons of the hobbit had been with inappropriate western European populations.
Study and journal criticised
But two of the original Australian discoverers of the hobbit, Professor Peter Brown and Professor Mike Morwood from the University of New England, have lashed out at the researchers, rejecting arguments put forward in the latest paper.
Brown also criticises the journal itself for publishing the research.
Brown says the paper's conclusions are "unsupported by any published evidence" and that the paper makes "misleading comments" about previously published papers.
Australian National University taxonomist Professor Colin Groves, who was not involved in the research, also rejects the PNAS paper.
"Most of their claims of pathology are not substantial," says Groves, who has a paper due out in the Journal of Human Evolution rejecting the microcephaly theory. 
Unethical conduct?
Brown says putting aside the scientific argument itself, PNAS should not have published the research because of what he says is the research team's "unethical scientific practice", a claim the authors reject.
One of the sticking points is whether correct permission was obtained to study the precious hobbit bones.
The PNAS article states that the researchers were permitted to study the hobbit materials in accordance with a research agreement between the Indonesian National Research Centre of Archaeology and the University of New England.
But Brown and Morwood say the researchers breached the agreement by removing the material from the archaeology centre in Jakarta before the Australian researchers had managed to complete their analysis.
It was removed without the agreement of both parties and without any conditions for proper credit, says Morwood.
Brown is also critical that Thorne had a flight to Indonesia paid for by an Australian TV company to examine the material.
But Thorne says there's nothing improper about this.
"The fact that my fares were paid by a television company is simply a function of the fact that I'm now retired and someone wants to pay my airfares I'm not going to knock it back," he says.
Brown also says the material was damaged beyond repair while being studied.
Thorne says he didn't see the material after it was returned from Jacob's lab but when he saw it, it was in fine condition.
Scientists behaving badly or a misunderstanding?
Overall, Brown thinks the conduct of the PNAS authors amounts to bad behaviour.
"I can't think of a more extreme example of unethical scientific practice," says Brown, "For PNAS to reward their behaviour casts aspersions on the journal."
Thorne says he doesn't understand the claim. He says he was invited to look at the material by Jacob, whom Thorne had met many times over his decades of research in Indonesia. 
"There was nothing unethical about that at all," he says, adding that the PNAS paper had five referees, including experts in anatomy, pathology, growth and development.
Journal stands by its paper
A spokesperson for the journal confirms the article was peer-reviewed prior to submission and also by a member of the PNAS editorial board before being accepted for publication. 
PNAS declined to comment on Brown's allegations, instead referring ABC Science Online's questions to the study authors.
