
The Ngarrindjeri people put the repatriated remains of their ancestors to rest. Image used with permission from the Aboriginal community
Aboriginal human remains stolen in the name of science are being reburied in traditional burial mounds using the latest technology to ensure that existing burials are not disturbed.
The reburial project, involving the Ngarrindjeri people of South Australia, will be discussed at the Australian Archaeological Association Conference in Melbourne next week.
Members of a thriving medical research community took Ngarrindjeri human remains during the 19th century and as late as the 1950s, says Flinders University archaeologist Dr Lynley Wallis, who is helping with the project.
She says literally thousands, if not tens of thousands, of bodies were removed.
"People were stealing bodies from graves around Adelaide," she says, adding that many traditional burial mounds were in sand dunes, which made it particularly easy for bodies to be taken.
"Sometimes it was within days or weeks [of burial]," she says. "Worse than that, they were being taken out of the morgue in Adelaide."
Remains were sent to places such as the British Museum and the Museum of Edinburgh in the UK, as well as the South Australian Museum and Museum Victoria in Australia, says Willis.
In 2003, the Museum of Edinburgh became the first to repatriate the remains of more than 300 Ngarrinjeri people.
Remains were not always complete sets of bones, she says.
"Sometimes it might be an organ in a jar. Sometimes it's a skull, sometimes it's a leg bone."
Some remains were up to 2200 years old, she says, and many of them had never been examined.
Voices of the Aboriginal community
Wallis is keen to emphasise she cannot speak on behalf of the Ngarrindjeri community, representatives of which were not immediately contactable.
But in an interview last year with a Flinders University researcher, chair of the Ngarrindjeri Heritage Committee, Uncle Tom Trevorrow, explained the need for reburial ceremonies for the repatriated remains of Old People, the term of respect used when referring to ancestors.
"We're forced to do a repeat of a funeral ceremony because other people have gone in and taken our Old People's bodies without listening to us or getting our permission," he said.
"We don't know what those Old People have been through, we don't know what they've done to them."
The customary burial ceremony involves smoking bodies to allow their spirits to travel and to be at rest.
Once disturbed from their resting places, this ceremony needed to be carried out again, Uncle Tom said.
Role of the archaeologists
Using the limited paperwork accompanying the remains, the Ngarrindjeri community has been identifying which burial mounds they were taken from.
"If they come from the river that's their country ... if they come from the lake that's their group," said Uncle Tom.
The first reburial took place at Hack's Point on 23 September this year.
To make sure they didn't disturb people and cultural objects already buried in the mounds, the community called on Wallis and others to help.
"The last thing they wanted to do was to disturb existing burials," says Wallis.
The team used various geophysical techniques to work out which areas in the burial mound they could dig up safely.
This is the first time such technology has been used for Indigenous reburials in Australia, says Wallis.
The researchers used a magnetometer to detect the mineral maghaemite, which could have formed from fires used during ceremonies.
The team also used electromagnetic induction that detects changes in moisture and conductivity of sediments that occur when ground is disturbed.
By combining the results of the two surveys the team identified a location in the burial mound where there had been no disturbance.
The remains of 23 people repatriated from the Museum of Edinburghwere reburied in the first ceremony.
"Thankfully our science worked and we didn't hit any existing burials," says Wallis.
Signs from the ancestors?
Wallis says the day before the first reburial a storm blew up over nearby Kangaroo Island, which Ngarrindjeri people call the "island of the dead", where spirits go after people have been buried.
They thought this was the old people stirring because they knew something was about to happen, says Wallis.
On the day itself, a large flock of pelicans flew over the burial ceremony, says Wallis who was present at the reburial.
Pelicans, known as ngori, are a totem for the Ngarrindjeri people and the flock were seen as the spirits of the old people coming to see the burial, says Wallis.
"It was so amazing, these huge flocks flying in formation. If you didn't believe in Indigenous connection to country, after going through that process you certainly would have."
