
Higher temperatures may change the strength of El Ni&ntilde;os, scientists report
Earth may be close to the warmest it has been in the past million years, especially in the part of the Pacific Ocean where potentially violent El Ni&ntilde;o weather patterns are born, climate scientists report. 
This doesn't necessarily mean there will be more frequent El Ni&ntilde;os, which can disrupt normal weather around the world. 
But it could mean that these wild patterns will be stronger when they occur, says Dr James Hansen of NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies.
The El Ni&ntilde;o phenomenon is an important factor in monitoring global warming, according to a paper by Hansen and colleagues in the current issue of the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
El Ni&ntilde;os can push temperatures higher than they might ordinarily be. This happened in 1998 when a so-called super-El Ni&ntilde;o helped to heat the Earth to the highest since records began.
What is significant, the scientists write, is that 2005 is in the same temperature range as 1998, and was among the warmest year ever on record, with no sign of the warm surface water in the eastern equatorial Pacific typical of an El Ni&ntilde;o.
The waters of the western equatorial Pacific are warmer than in the eastern equatorial Pacific, and the difference in temperature between these two areas could produce greater temperature swings between the normal weather pattern and El Ni&ntilde;o, they write. 
They blame this phenomenon on climate change, which they say is affecting the surface of the western Pacific before it affects the deeper water. 
El Ni&ntilde;o and climate change
Overall, Earth is within 1&deg;C of its highest temperature levels in the past million years, Hansen and the others write.
They note a recent steep rise in average temperatures, with global surface temperatures increasing about 0.2&deg;C for each of the past three decades. 
Many scientists attribute this rise to human activities, notably the release into the atmosphere of greenhouse gases that let in sunlight and trap its heat like the glass walls of a greenhouse.
Human-caused global warming influences El Ni&ntilde;os much as it sways tropical storms, the scientists write. 
"The effect on frequency of either phenomenon is unclear, depending on many factors, but the intensity of the most powerful events is likely to increase as greenhouse gases increase," they write.
"Slowing the growth rate of greenhouse gases should diminish the probability of both super-El Ni&ntilde;os and the most intense tropical storms."
