
It's how you see things. Throughout the ages, scientists have been quick to judge scientists whose work doesn't fit their view of the world
Scientists may say they are dispassionate defenders of the unfettered pursuit of truth. But history suggests they are often guilty of being irrational and narrow-minded, says an Australian philosopher.
Emeritus Professor Miles Little of the University of Sydney argues his case in the current issue of the journal Medical Humanities.
"Science is supposed to be the ultimate in rationality. It's supposed to be the ultimate in evidence and the assessment of evidence," says Little, a former surgeon now at the university's Centre for Values, Ethics and the Law in Medicine.
"But science doesn't behave like this in the face of aberrant science."
Aberrant science can involve the use of methods or the arrival at conclusions the majority don't agree with and is often shunned as if it was fraudulent, he says.
And yet, says Little, some aberrant science is by honest hardworking scientists who produce very important results.
While fraud is clearly an undesirable form of aberrant science, Little says those whose only crime is to use unusual methods or reach unusual conclusions should not be treated with the same contempt.
Instead, he says, they should be greeted with open-mindedness, a feature that is supposed to be the hallmark of good science.
Little says an example of such unfairly treated aberrant science is something that challenges the current scientific paradigm, the given set of assumptions about how the world works.
An example of this is the claim, made by immunologist Dr Jacques Benveniste in the late 1980s.
He said a solution of antibodies so dilute they were unlikely to contain any molecules could activate white blood cells, a claim could be used to support the claims of homoeopathy.
Little says the scientific community's immediate response to what they saw as "dysfunctional science" was to attack Benveniste personally and to vilify and humiliate him.
"The way the judgement was made was not scientific," says Little.
While subsequent attempts failed to reproduce Benveniste's results, Little says the outcome of other cases of aberrant science have been eventually accepted. 
One example is Professor Joseph Lister who argued against the wisdom of the 19th century that pus was a sign of infection by germs, which should be prevented from entering wounds.
"The majority of surgeons rejected it out of hand," says Little.
Lister was seen as a "young whippersnapper, defying well-established tradition, flying in the face of authority" and it took the next generation of surgeons to accept his views.
Little says a related category of unfairly treated aberrant science is something that challenges the accepted ideology of the day. 
