
A silent, unmanned drone could help crack down on urban crime, US police say
Police in the US have launched what they say is the future of law enforcement in the form of a drone aircraft, bringing technology usually associated with combat zones to urban policing. 
The unmanned aerial vehicle, which looks like a child's remote control toy and weighs about 2.3 kilograms, is being tested by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department.
Police say the SkySeer drone will be able to accomplish tasks too dangerous for officers and free up helicopters for other missions.
The technology could be used to find missing children, search for lost hikers, or survey a fire zone, says Commander Sid Heal, head of the Technology Exploration Project of the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department. 
It will also be helpful in tracking down suspected burglars on rooftops and chasing down suspects fleeing on foot. 
The drone is equipped with low-light and infrared capabilities and can fly at speeds up to 48 kilometres per hour for 70 minutes. 
High-tech kite fits in a backpack
The plane collapses and can fit into a shoulder pack smaller than a golf bag. 
"It's basically a high-tech kite that field officers could set up in a matter of minutes," Heal says. 
A small camera capable of tilt and pan operations is fixed to the underside of the drone and sends the video directly to a laptop command station.
Once launched, the craft is set to fly autonomously with global positioning system (GPS) coordinates and a fixed flight pattern. 
As technology improves, the drone will be outfitted with zoom capabilities. For now, the craft simply flies lower to hone in on its target.
Police say the SkySeer's stealth quality is a big advantage.
"The plane is virtually silent and invisible," says Heal. "It will give us a vertical perspective that we have never had." 
He predicts that unmanned surveillance crafts will become the norm in urban policing. 
Sam De La Torre, designer of the drone at Octatron Industries, has been working on the project for two years and says he has seen demand from other police forces. 
Is Big Brother watching you?
The SkySeer isn't capable of spying into windows yet, but privacy advocates say a future of surveillance by invisible eyes in the sky is an unsettling development. 
 "A helicopter can be seen and heard, and one can make behaviour choices based on that," said Beth Givens of the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse. 
"Do we really want to live in a society where our backyard barbeques will be open to police scrutiny?" 
For now, the sheriffs will continue trial runs of the SkySeer to get a handle on its capabilities and work at fixing glitches in its operation, including a "communication interference" that caused the high tech kite to nosedive and crash during a field test last week.
