
You can make music just by flexing your fingers in the air
Musicians can jam together by making gestures with their fingers in the air, says an Australian researcher.
Dr Alistair Riddell at the Australian National University has developed a system that allows groups of people to make music with a sensor system that translates finger movement into sound.
"It's a form of wearable instrument," says Riddell, who will help facilitate a workshop on wearable technology in Canberra next year called reSkin.
Riddell has already given performances with other musicians using the system.
"It was a very strange kind of performance because people just looked at you and you were moving your hands in front of them and just basically staring at them," he says.
Each musician has flexible sensors strapped to both thumbs and six of their fingers.
As the sensors bend, this changes their electrical resistance, which in turn communicates changes in sound properties such as the type of sound, its pitch, volume, and effect such as echo.
Each finger involved has between 2 and 100 different positions that corresponded to different parameters, Riddell says.
Signals are sent to a microcontroller on the musician's back and then on to other computers that build the composition and create the sounds.
While the idea of creating sound with gesture has been explored previously, Riddell's system is the first to enable more than one person to be involved.
"We shared the same computational space," he says of the peformances. "It wasn't like we were three musicians with three guitars, we were actually three musicians with one guitar."
During the performance Riddell hid the technology to maximise dramatic potential.
"What you really saw were three people standing in front of you with their hands raised in front of them and they were bending their fingers," he says.
And at the end of the performance the group extended their fingers, brought their arms down by their side and the music stopped.
Challenges
Riddell says one of the challenges was attaching the sensors and microcontrollers to the musicians.
"It's really tricky to put any type of technology close to the skin," he says. "There seems to be some incongruity between technology and our biological wrapping."
In the end he had special jackets made up to carry the equipment.
Riddell describes performing with the hand sensor system as enjoyable but very exposing, sometimes embarrassing and surprisingly physically demanding.
"After 20 minutes or so your hands would really get very sore," he says.
One of Riddell's collaborators, sound and media artist Somaya Langley, is now working on a similar system that uses accelerometers instead of flex sensors attached to arms instead of fingers.
As you move your arms in space, their acceleration in time and space is measured. This is linked to sounds produced by a computer that are played through a quadraphonic sound system.
She says the aim is to be able to throw your arms around in space and be seen to be throwing around a sound.
"It's kind of like having a virtual sound-object like a beach ball," she says.
