
Scarecrows have moved away from the veggie patch. Hi-tech scarecrows are now scaring birds away from fish farms, with help from the web and a mobile phone
A computerised scarecrow could be the next defence against unwanted birds, its US developers say.
The Intelligent Scarecrow, designed by computer science and engineering students at the University of South Florida in Tampa, uses a computer, an internet camera and imaging software to detect birds around fish ponds.
In response, the scarecrow makes loud noises or powerful bursts of water to scare the birds away.
Fish farmers go to great lengths and sometimes expense to keep fish-eating birds at bay.
Deterrents include everything from tethered balloons, netting and bird-chasing dogs to propane cannons, pyrotechnics and motion-sensitive sprinklers.
But most methods don't work well, are expensive or loud. 
The Intelligent Scarecrow is dressed in like an American football player, with helmet and baggy jersey. But it is brains, not brawn, that make it a threat.
The helmet conceals an internet-enabled videocamera that takes in a wide field of view, which can be accessed via a website. A microprocessor with image processing software the students wrote scans for colour and shape differences between frames.
If the software sees bright orange, it will not trigger a response. So a farmer wearing a bright orange vest can tend crops without being seen as a threat. 
But other changes trigger sprinklers to the right and left of the scarecrow to shoot out powerful jets of water up to 9 metres.
Blasting the birds
The device can also blast loud sounds, such as a shotgun noise or the cry of a predatory hawk, through nearby speakers.
And because it's internet-enabled, the scarecrow can send a text message to a mobile phone or an email to a computer alerting the farmer of threats.
"As far as the bird is concerned, this thing is intelligent," says Associate Professor Ken Christensen, who oversaw the students' development of the Intelligent Scarecrow.
But the scarecrow may have a long way to go before it stands post over a pond, says Craig Watson, director of the Tropical Research Laboratory at the University of Florida in Ruskin.
"The area it would cover is not practical with a 10- to 100-acre fish farm," he says. 
And unless the scarecrow can move around regularly, the birds will become accustomed to it and no longer see it as a threat.
Christensen and his students are now working to extend the scarecrow's predator detection range and water-spraying accuracy and range.
