
Humans aren't the only animal that weigh up costs and benefits
Rats, like humans, carefully weigh the costs and benefits of making certain decisions, a new study has found.
The study, accepted for publication in the journal Behavioural Brain Research, is the first to demonstrate this behaviour in non-human animals.
A person buying a new car, for example, must weigh the cost and the effort needed to make payments versus the value of the car. 
Rats, and likely all rodents, do something similar, only under a lot more pressure.
"In its natural habitat, rats are facing the problem that little is under their control, so they are facing various levels and forms of uncertainty all the time," says study leader Dr Ruud van den Bos of the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine at Utrecht University in The Netherlands.
"For instance, the quality and amount of food items at patches varies over time and between different patches, thus benefits are not always the same."
"The amount of energy spent to obtain these different items varies during the different foraging sessions, as sometimes it's cold, sometimes it's hot, sometimes it rains, sometimes sudden obstacles are present after heavy storms, etc."
T-shaped maze forces rats to choose
Van den Bos and team attempted to duplicate such challenges by manipulating barriers in a T-shaped maze that rats explored. 
The Wistar rats, a rodent developed for research, entered at the bottom of the "T," which connected two arms.
At the end of each arm was a chamber filled with treats. One side had a low reward  - one sugar pellet - while the other side had three to five sugar pellets.
Rats that wanted the higher rewards had to climb steep barriers. It would be like placing a person's favourite dessert behind a high wall that would have to be scaled before the individual could nosh. 
The researchers varied the size of the barrier and the amount of reward on that side to see how the rodents would react.
At first the rats went for the easy pickings, but when they determined more sweets were available on the other side of the maze, they exerted additional effort, but only after a certain point. 
When the pain yielded too little gain, they stuck with the tiny treat.
The researchers also noted that rats seem to behave according to an internal constant standard, a relative ratio for each situation by which choices are measured. 
This is comparable to how a car purchaser may enter a dealership with a budget in mind. Since this standard varies depending on the situation, it is possibly part inherent and part created by individuals.
Rats could get depressed too
Dr John Salamone, professor and head of behavioural neuroscience at the University of Connecticut, developed the T-maze for previous studies. 
He also recently authored a paper in Current Psychiatry Reviews  that determined problems in the brain associated with effort-related processes, such as how much energy an individual will put out to obtain a reward, could be linked to depression.
This suggests rats get depressed too. Salamone's own research indicates interference with dopamine, a neurotransmitter chemical in the brain, may make individuals less likely to work for rewards and biased toward low-effort alternatives.
"Exertion of effort and energy and energy-related decision-making are fundamental for survival, in humans and other animals, and I am very happy that more and more people are getting involved in this sort of research," says Salamone, who added the new work was "an excellent piece of research."
