
Huge underground Antarctic lakes, like Lake Vostok pictured here, are connected by fast-flowing underground rivers that stretch for hundreds of kilometres
Scientists have found huge, powerful rivers that may connect subglacial lakes deep under the Antarctic ice.
UK researchers who discovered the plumbing system that moves water hundreds of kilometres say it challenges the notion that the lakes under the Antarctic ice evolved independently and could support ancient life. 
"Previously, it was thought water moves underneath the ice by very slow seepage," says Professor Duncan Wingham of University College London (UCL) who headed the research team. 
"But this new data shows that, every so often, the lakes beneath the ice pop off like champagne corks, releasing floods that travel very long distances." 
Scientists had plans to drill through the ice to take samples from the lakes but were worried about contaminating them with new microbes. 
"We had thought of these lakes as isolated biological laboratories. Now we are going to have to think again," Wingham says.
The research, reported today in the journal Nature, also means that water from the Antarctic lakes, which were first discovered in the 1960s, could have flowed into the ocean in the past and could do so again. 
About 150 subglacial lakes have been discovered in Antarctica but researchers believe there could be thousands. 
Lake Vostok, at 15-20 million years old, is thought to be the oldest.
Looking at satellite images
Scientists from UCL and the UK's Natural Environment Research Council Centre for Polar Observation and Modelling found the rivers by examining changes in measurements taken by the European Space Agency ERS-2 satellite of a region in East Antarctica known as the Dome Concordia. 
They noticed that the ice surface was 3 metres lower over one subglacial lake but it bulged by 1 metre at two other subglacial lakes about 290 kilometres away.
They suspect these changes show a flow of water from one subglacial lake to the others and calculate 1.8 cubic kilometres of water would have moved over 16 months.
"The lakes are like a set of beads on a string, where the lakes are the beads connected by a string or river of water," says Wingham. 
The scientists believe when the pressure in one of the lakes increases, a flood fills the next bead down the string.
But they do not know whether the flow of water that melts ice causes a chain reaction down the string.
A mere drop
Iceland has underground lakes that fill quickly and flush out, says Canadian researcher Professor Garry Clarke, from the University of British Columbia.
But Clarke says, in the same issue of Nature, they discharge water 100 times faster than in Antarctica. 
"The actual discharge [in Antarctica] was hardly catastrophic," he writes.
And the Antarctic outflow is "miniscule" compared with the megafloods of the last Ice Age.
Clarke writes how outflows from glacial Lake Missoula in what is now North America was 200,000 times more powerful than the UK researchers found in Antarctica.
