
Scientists are analysing bone marrow from a frog that lived 10 million years before this one
The first fossilised bone marrow has been found in the bones of 10-million-year-old frogs, salamanders and tadpoles, scientists say.
Palaeontologist Maria McNamara says the find could tell us more about whether ancient creatures hibernated or whether they were cold-or warm-blooded. 
McNamara, a researcher from University College Dublin, says her international team found the fossils in ancient lake deposits in the Libros area of northeastern Spain. 
McNamara says one of the most exciting aspects of the discovery is what the marrow will be able to tell scientists about creatures that lived during the later Miocene period.
"The original organic material is still there," according to McNamara, whose research was published in the latest issue of the journal Geology.
"It is still organic in composition, whereas most traces of soft tissues you find in the fossil record, which are very rare anyway, have rotted away and just the shape of the tissue is preserved in mineral," she says. 
"Tissue like bone marrow carries a lot of physiological information. It can tell you the state of the organism when it died, was it healthy, did it hibernate, where did it produce its red blood cells and whether it was warm-blooded or cold-blooded," she says. 
"They would be pretty important to find for some other fossil groups like dinosaurs. It could help to resolve some debate about whether they were warm-blooded or cold-blooded," McNamara says. 
She says researchers are now doing tests to see if any biomolecules, like amino acids or proteins, are preserved.
McNamara, who is undertaking the research as part of work for a doctoral degree, says there are a number of reasons why fossilised bone marrow has never been found before. 
"Because bone marrow rots away so quickly when people die, people never thought that it could be preserved," she says.
"Also, because you have to fracture the bones before you can see inside, obviously if you have nice fossil specimens in a museum you are not going to get permission to break them up." 
The researchers were able to access the marrow from the fossils because they were found in rock that had split and some of the bones had fractured as a result. 
McNamara says the original red and yellow colours of the marrow have been preserved.
"The fatty bone marrow is yellow and is a sort of energy reserve in terms of starvation or something and you also have red bone marrow and that is where your blood cells are produced," she says.
"In the fossil bone marrow the original structure is preserved showing where the red and yellow marrow would have been but also the original colour is preserved and there are some cells preserved as well."
