
As oil reserves dwindle, it is being suggested we could use underground explosions to increase the permeability of rocks and make it easier to extract the remaining oil
Creating artificial seismic waves, similar to those that occur during an earthquake, could help squeeze more oil from natural reservoirs, say scientists.
Dr Emily Brodsky of University of California, Santa Cruz and colleagues report their findings in today's issue of the journal Nature.
"Shaking increases permeability," says Brodsky, an assistant professor of earth sciences.
"Permeability governs how fluid flows through rock, whether it's water or oil, so this has practical implications for oil extraction," she says. 
Brodsky and colleagues also found that the amount of permeability is directly related to the amplitude of the shaking. 
"Potentially if you could increase permeability you could greatly increase the available oil you could tap out of a reserve," she says. 
One way of doing that, in principle, is by mimicking the effects of an earthquake, using, for example underground explosions.
"If we understood the physics of the permeability enhancement well enough, the vibrations could be tuned to increase with the flow of oil," Brodsky says.
Clues from water seepage
The scientists made their discovery after studying 20 years of data of water seeping in and out of wells during seven earthquakes in an area of California. 
They found that water levels in the wells rose and fell gradually according to local weather and rainfall.
But superimposed on these long-term trends were regular, daily variations of a few centimetres owing to the 'solid Earth tides'.
As the motion of the Moon around the Earth makes local sea levels rise and fall tidally each day, so this and the Earth's rotation causes tidal 'squeezing' of the solid Earth. 
The effect is tiny, but it squeezes the porous rock of the aquifer that feeds the wells, pressurising the water held in the pores and forcing regular changes of up to 3 centimetres in the well water.
As the squeezing subsides, well water flows back into the aquifer.
But how quickly this happens depends on the permeability of the rock.
The team noticed that every time an earthquake occurred the permeability jumped and the surrounding rocks became up to three times more permeable.
A few months after the tremor the rocks relaxed back into its original state and permeability returned to normal levels. 
The scientists are planning more studies to better understand what aspects of the shaking makes the permeability increase.
They are also interested in studying how seismically induced changes in fluid flow within geological faults might trigger further earthquakes.
