
Solar roof tiles would provide an alternative to conventional solar panel systems
A roof tile that harnesses solar energy to heat water and generate electricity, has been invented by an Australian industrial designer.
The plastic tile is filled with solar cells and connects to a house's hot water system and electrical wiring.
Sebastian Braat, a graduate of the University of Western Sydney, says the tiles are designed with urban dwellings in mind - particularly the new generation of so-called "McMansion" style suburban homes. 
"My project is focussing on getting the technology into the city and easing the power burden our housing estates are rapidly creating," he says.
The tiles consist of a clear polycarbonate chassis containing a water vessel and photovoltaic cells.
The tiles can be manufactured to match a variety of roof tile styles.
Between 12 and 18% of thermal energy that hits the cells is converted into electricity. The remainder is used to heat the water.
Braat says he runs a coolant through the water in the tiles, which goes to a heat exchanger. The heat exchanger transfers the heat to a regular hot water storage tank.
Creating an energy surplus
Meanwhile, the solar cells generate electricity as direct current that goes to an inverter connected to the house's power box, which remains connected to the electricity grid.
 "The idea of being grid connected is that you generate loads more power than you need during the day and that gets fed back into the grid," he says.
"That means the house in effect is generating its own power and generating the excess into the grid.
"If the house uses more than it generates the user gets charged, if not they get a credit from the power company."
How many tiles does it take?
Braat says it takes about 200 tiles to generate a maximum of 1.5 kilowatts - more than enough for an average three-bedroom suburban house over a year.
Dr Dong Chen, a research scientist with CSIRO Manufacturing and Infrastructure Technology, who wasn't involved in the design, says it makes sense to use roof tiles, or any exposed parts of a house, for solar heating.
He says Braat may need to look at how efficient the tiles are, and the pitch of the roof may affect this.
Chen says the inventor will also need to look at the cost of the tiles, including their maintenance, and how safe they are.
He says it's also possible the roof could leak because the tiles may involve a number of small joints.
