
The UK's mainstream power providers have caught onto wind power, technology they once dismissed
Environmental activists are driving commercial innovation and seeding new mainstream industries, a UK study says.
University of Sussex researchers carried out the study for the UK's Economic and Social Research Council.
The study says rather than putting up hurdles to economic progress, radical activist groups and proponents of a greener lifestyle are driving developments in mainstream businesses like wind energy, organic food and eco-housing.
"Activists often struggle to keep projects going and fail to produce the radical transformations they originally envisaged," says author Dr Adrian Smith.
"This lack of breakthrough inclines them (and others) to underestimate the effect of their ideas.
"But we found that although their influence is more subtle and beyond their control, it is still hugely significant in many cases."
Australian sustainability pioneer and engineering lecturer at the University of Technology Sydney, Michael Mobbs, says the report rings true for him.
The environmental lawyer was renovating his Sydney home in 1996 when he decided to put in sustainable features, including a water tank, a reused sewage system and solar panels.
At the time people thought he was "frothing at the mouth or somehow abnormal", he says.
Ten years later, 17,000 people have toured his home and he advises policy makers, developers, builders, architects, engineers and "mainstream, middle class Australians".
"There are now laws requiring rain tanks and many of the things I did that were regarded as weird and stupid are now in red tape," he says.
"The engineers who were once critical of me are now describing themselves as sustainability experts."
Mobbs is currently helping Western Australia's Department for Planning and Infrastructure design a sustainable village at Gracetown.
Tamra Lysaght is the managing director of Australia's National Invention Centre, which helps innovators commercialise their ideas.
Australia may be lagging behind Europe in taking up the ideas of fringe groups because she says Australia's environmental problems aren't as pressing and there's less government support for sustainable projects.
She says while the centre doesn't usually deal directly with activists, aspiring inventors often put an environmental spin their product as a "selling point".
Lysaght says no one single group can be credited with driving change and a move to more sustainable industries is a response to a network of social and economic factors.
She also says environmental activist groups can sometimes be an impediment to the development of potentially beneficial technologies, such as nuclear power.
"The environmental movement has certainly been a key player in curtailing the nuclear power industry in Australia and globally," she says.
"But whether you view that as good or bad depends on which side of the fence you're sitting on."
The report Supporting and Harnessing Diversity? Experiments in Appropriate Technology can be downloaded from the research council's website.
