
This komodo dragon was a 'virgin birth' at London Zoo recently. Another batch is expected at Chester Zoo this Christmas
Flora, a pregnant komodo dragon living in a UK zoo, is expecting eight babies in what scientists say could be a Christmas virgin birth. 
Flora has never mated, or even mixed, with a male dragon, and fertilised all the eggs herself, a process culminating in parthenogenesis, or virgin birth.
"Nobody in their wildest dreams expected this. But you have a female dragon on her own. She produces a clutch of eggs and those eggs turn out to be fertile. It is nature finding a way," says Kevin Buley of Chester Zoo.
He says the incubating eggs could hatch around Christmas. 
Parthenogenesis has occurred in other lizard species, but Buley and his team says this is the first time it has been shown in komodo dragons, the world's largest lizards. 
Scientists at the University of Liverpool discovered Flora had had no male help after doing genetic tests on three eggs that collapsed after being put in an incubator. 
The tests on the embryos and on Flora, her sister and other dragons confirmed that komodo dragons can reproduce through self-fertilisation. 
"Those genetic tests confirmed absolutely that Flora was both the mother and the father of the embryos. It completely blew us away because it [parthenogenesis] has never been seen in such a large species," Buley says. 
A komodo dragon at London Zoo gave birth earlier this year after being separated from males for more than two years. 
Scientists thought she had been able to store sperm from her earlier encounter with a male.
But after hearing about Flora's eggs, researchers conducted tests that showed her eggs were also produced without male help. 
"You have two institutions within a few short months of each other having a previously unheard of event. It is really quite unprecedented," says Buley. 
The scientists, reporting the discovery today in the journal Nature, say it could help them understand how reptiles colonise new areas.
A female dragon could, for instance, swim to another island and establish a new colony on her own. 
"The genetics of self-fertilisation in lizards means that all her hatchlings would have to be male. These would grow up to mate with their own mother and therefore, within one generation, there would potentially be a population able to reproduce normally on the new island," Buley says.
