
Humpback whales shed skin in the water, which scientists scoop up in a kitchen sieve and analyse
Researchers may one-day be able to tell how old a whale is by looking for clues in its sloughed-off skin.
News of this noninvasive method, which relies on examining the tips of chromosomes, is published today in the journal Nature.
Scientists are interested in finding out the age of individual whales to assess the impact of decades of commercial whaling and to learn about mating tactics and behaviour.
Some whales can be aged by studying their teeth. But humpback whales don't have any so are aged by counting layers in their ear wax instead, a procedure that can only be performed on a dead whale. 
Now researchers from the Whale Research Centre at Australia's Southern Cross University are developing another method.
They trail behind the mammals in a boat. They then use a kitchen sieve tied to the end of a stick to scoop up flakes of skin, which can be the size of a hand.
The skin is shed naturally when the whales soar out of the water or slap their tails onto the surface.
The researchers believe they may be able to develop a system to work out a whale's age by removing genetic material from the skin samples. 
Clues in the chromosomes
They are studying the tips of chromosomes known as telomeres, which whittle away over time in some animals, like a countdown timer.
By measuring the length of these telomeres and comparing that with a known rate of shortening, the researchers hope to estimate a whale's age.
There are many hurdles to overcome, researchers admit. For instance no-one knows for certain whether all whales have telomeres that shorten with time. And not all skin flakes yield enough genetic material to analyse. Then the researchers have to calibrate their methods against whales of a known age.
But the Nature report indicates that preliminary reports are encouraging.
"If they are right, one of the key arguments in favour of killing whales for scientific purposes will be dead in the water," the report says.
The researchers say the need for humane methods to age whales is now urgent, since Japan has declared it will increase its annual catch of whales for "research purposes", the report says. 
The International Whaling Commission imposed a moratorium on commercial whaling in 1986 but Japan has continued hunting for what it calls scientific research.
