
Australia is developing the world's first koala sperm bank
Zoos around the world will soon be able to breed their own koalas without having to fly in breeding stock from Australia, researchers say.
They say new technology to preserve sperm will allow koala sperm to be exported from Australia for the first time.
University of Queensland reproductive biologist and team leader Dr Steve Johnston says the researchers have been able to extend the shelf life of the sperm to 40 hours.
They've done this by diluting the semen in a special pH balanced solution containing nutrients and antibiotics, and keeping it chilled.
The team this week unveiled eight koala joeys born from artificial insemination with the diluted semen.
Being able to dilute the semen is the first step in being able to provide frozen specimens internationally and interstate, Johnston says.
This is because fresh koala semen only lasts a couple of hours and the fragility of the cells means they don't easily survive freezing and thawing.
The team now plans to set up the world's first koala sperm bank.
What do koalas and camels have in common?
Johnston says koalas, like camels, have a special factor in their sperm which triggers ovulation in the female. 
"What we found was ... there's a combination between the mating itself and the factor in the semen which causes the [brain] to release luteinising hormone, which results in the ovulation process," he says.
Diluting the semen without affecting the ovulation factor was a major challenge for researchers, he says.
"Diluting is a first step because if you're going to freeze something you have to put it into a diluent which allows you to put cryoprotectants in the fluid to protect the sperm against freezing," he says.
"The other thing is when you dilute the sperm you don't have to use as much, you don't waste as much sperm when inseminating."
Low sperm count
Koalas have a relatively low sperm count with only about 100 million sperm per ejaculation, compared with echidnas, which have 10 times that amount.
Johnston says being able to send a frozen sperm sample internationally will make it easier to introduce genetic diversity to koala populations.
And setting up a sperm bank will help conservation efforts in Australia and enable samples to be screened for common koala diseases like chlamydia and retroviruses.
But don't hold your breath about buying your very own koala sperm online, Johnston says.
"The Queensland government is making sure that none of that will happen."
