
Is this an accurate representation of actor Nicole Kidman? Or is she fatter or thinner in real life? These questions are the basis of new research into body image
People who are unhappy with their own body are likely to think celebrities are thinner then they really are, new Australian research shows.
The study is more evidence that being dissatisfied with your body is likely to distort your perception of other people's bodies. 
Lead researcher Amy Willinge, who is undertaking a doctorate of clinical psychology at the University of Sydney, reports the findings online in the International Journal of Eating Disorders.
She asked 118 normal weight university students, mostly aged 17 to 22, to study actual photographs of thin female celebrities and computer-altered images showing them as thinner or heavier. 
Participants chose the image they thought was the actual size of each celebrity and which they thought was the 'ideal' size for a female.
The five 'underweight' celebrities were Nicole Kidman, Kylie Minogue, Holly Valance, Angelina Jolie and Sarah Jessica Parker.
Each had one full-length photo of their true size and six others which were 10%, 20% and 30% thinner and heavier than reality, displayed randomly on the same screen.
When trying to identify the actual photos, body-dissatisfied males and females chose images that were significantly thinner than in reality.
They also chose an ideal size thinner than the celebrity's real size.
People who were satisfied with their body were more realistic and accurate in judging celebrities' actual sizes.
While body-satisfied females picked ideals that were larger than the celebrity's real size, males viewed thin as the female ideal.
"The research suggests that if people are not satisfied with their own body, it may lead them to distort their perceptions of others' bodies, and forge unrealistic attitudes towards ideal body sizes, setting themselves up for an increased risk of eating disorders, low self-esteem and depression," Willinge says.
"The finding that body satisfied and dissatisfied males identified a very thin body size as ideal for women indicates there is increasing pressure from society on women to be thin.
"Media presentation of thin female images is affecting males' attitudes towards female bodies, putting increasing pressure on females to obtain the idealised body image."
But she says the findings absolve the media of some blame as it is not just presentation of thin images that results in body dissatisfaction but the way body-dissatisfied people view images.
