
In less than 50 years, fish markets like this one in India may not have any produce to sell
The world's fish and seafood populations will collapse by 2048 if current trends in habitat destruction and overfishing continue, resulting in less food for humans, researchers say. 
When they analysed scientific data going back to the 1960s and historical records over a thousand years, they found that marine biodiversity - the variety of ocean fish, shellfish, birds, plants and micro-organisms - had declined dramatically. Some 29% of species were already in collapse. 
Extending this pattern into the future, the scientists calculate that by 2048 all species would be in collapse, which the researchers defined as having catches decline 90% from the maximum catch. 
This applies to all species, from mussels and clams to tuna and swordfish, says Assistant Professor Boris Worm, lead author of the study, which is published today in the journal Science. 
Ocean mammals, including seals, killer whales and dolphins, are also affected. 
"Whether we looked at tide pools or studies over the entire world's ocean, we saw the same picture emerging," says Worm, from Dalhousie University in Halifax, Nova Scotia.
"In losing species we lose the productivity and stability of entire ecosystems. I was shocked and disturbed by how consistent these trends are, beyond anything we suspected."
When ocean species collapse, it makes the ocean itself weaker and less able to recover from shocks like global climate change, Worm says. 
The decline in marine biodiversity is largely due to overfishing and destruction of habitat, says Worm.
Over-exploitation
The loss of biodiversity makes ocean ecosystems less able to recover from the effects of global climate change, pollution and over-exploitation, Worm says. 
He likens a diverse ocean environment to a diversified investment portfolio. 
With lots of different species in the oceans, just as with lots of different kinds of investments, "you spread the risk around", Worm says. 
"In the ocean ecosystem, we're losing a lot of the species in our stock portfolio, and by that we're losing productivity and stability. By losing stability, we're losing the ability of the system to self-repair."
To help depleted areas rebuild, marine-life reserves and no-fishing zones need to be set up, the authors say. 
With marine reserves in place, fishing near the reserves can improve as much as four-fold, Worm says. 
Beyond the economic benefits to coastal communities where fishing is a critical industry, there are environmental benefits to rebuilding marine biodiversity, the scientists say. 
Depleted coastal ecosystems are vulnerable to invasive species, disease outbreaks, coastal flooding and noxious algae blooms, they report. 
Certain kinds of aquaculture, like the traditional Chinese cultivation of carp using vegetable waste, can also be beneficial, according to the scientists.
But farms that aim to raise carnivorous fish are less effective.
