
Banning the fluoroquinolone class of antibiotics in animal feed means humans are more likely to respond to these powerful antibiotics if they need them
Reducing the use of antibiotics in food-producing animals leads to less drug resistance in humans, an Australian study confirms for the first time.
Researchers examined samples from 585 people with gastroenteritis due to the nation's most common bacterial cause of foodborne disease, Campylobacter jejuni.
Tests identified a low level of resistance to the fluoroquinolone group of antibiotics, which Australia has banned in food-producing animals like poultry.
One investigator, senior lecturer in epidemiology at the Australia National University in Canberrra, Dr Mahomed Patel, says flouroquinolones are powerful, newer generation antibiotics that should be reserved for "pretty severe infections in humans".
The study found that only 2% of the Australian-acquired campylobacter infections were resistant to ciprofloxacin, a type of flouroquinolone. 
In countries that allow fluoroquinolones to be used in animals, ciprofloxacin resistant strains are up to 15 times more common in humans, studies show.
Drug resistance could make these infections hard to treat, lengthen bouts of diarrhoea and increase risk of serious or fatal illness.
"The very low level of ciprofloxacin resistance in C. jejuni isolates likely reflects the success of Australia's policy of restricting use of fluoroquinolones in food-producing animals," researchers say in a paper to be published in the journal Clinical Infectious Diseases.
Those tested were from Queensland, South Australia, Victoria, Tasmania and Western Australia, states that require reporting of patients infected with the bacteria, and were hospitalised with gastroenteritis or remained in the community.
Patel says it is unknown why ciprofloxacin resistance ranged from 0% among Tasmanian patients to 8% in infected Victorians.
But as expected, there were much higher rates of resistance to other antibiotics among Australian-acquired infections, especially those more commonly used by people in the community.
International evidence
He says this is the first Australian study to support evidence seen in countries such as Sweden and Norway that banning use in animals means low rates of fluoroquinolone-resistant campylobacter infections in humans. 
"It confirms Australia has remained relatively free of problems because we've never used these antibiotics in animals; avoiding animal use has prevented resistance in humans," Patel says.
Those infected outside Australia were more likely to have a resistant strain, especially if they had travelled to Asia. 
Reasons could include contact with an infected person or eating meat from an animal with the resistant bacteria, Patel says.
In Australia causes could include medical treatment with the antibiotics, eating imported contaminated food or acquiring resistance in hospital.
