
The celestial body now known as Eris with her moon Dysnomia
'Xena', the lonely rock at the edge of the solar system that caused Pluto's downfall has now been officially named Eris after the Greek goddess of strife.
"Eris caused strife and discord by causing quarrels among people and that's what this one has done too," says Assistant Professor Mike Brown, the California Institute of Technology researcher who discovered the object. 
Brown's discovery, larger and further from the Sun than Pluto, set off a heated debate about what should be considered a planet. 
The 2500 members of the International Astronomical Union decided last month to downgrade Pluto to a 'dwarf planet', leaving only eight full planets in the solar system.
Many scientists have not accepted the change. 
Eris, pronounced EE-ris, is also considered a dwarf planet. The most distant known solar system object from the Sun, it takes 557 years to complete an orbit.
Unlike Pluto, its orbit does not cross paths with Neptune, the most distant full-sized planet. 
The body was dubbed 2003 UB313 after it was discovered. Brown nicknamed it Xena, after the television warrior princess. But he says he didn't consider that to be an appropriate formal name for a celestial body.
"Then the next one would be Spock or something, and that wouldn't be quite so dignified," Brown says.
The astronomers' union accepted Eris this week. The group also accepted Brown's proposed name for Eris's moon Dysnomia. 
Dysnomia is Eris's daughter in Greek mythology, and the word means lawlessness in Greek.
"It sounds like a disease. But in any case we all liked it," says Dr Ted Bowell, an astronomer at Lowell Observatory in Arizona who heads the division of the astronomers' union that deals with planets.
Brown says he plans to study Eris and Dysnomia further to figure out the dwarf planet's mass and density.
Greek mythology
In Greek mythology, Eris started the Trojan war after she was excluded from a wedding on Mount Olympus, home of the gods.
To get revenge, she tossed an apple inscribed "to the most beautiful one" into the party, causing a squabble among the goddesses. 
Paris, the prince of Troy, was forced to settle the dispute by picking one goddess as most beautiful, earning the spite of the others and the ultimate defeat of his city in the Trojan war.
