
A good budget for medical research in the short term, says one expert
The Australian government should have spent more of its budget surplus on building the nation's future r&d capacity rather than tax breaks, say commentators in the science community.
The 2006-07 federal budget  has delivered A$5.97 billion for science and innovation and $559.6 million to universities, primarily for capital developments.
While the government describes the spending on science and innovation as being at record level, and points to a big boost given to medical research, many say the government's spending priorities are leaving Australia behind in terms of future capacity.
Professor Snow Barlow of the University of Melbourne says the amount spent on science and innovation may be a record in absolute terms, but as a percentage of gross national product it is decreasing.
"It's actually lower than it's been in 20 years," says Barlow, who is a former member of the Prime Minister's Science, Engineering and Innovation Council.
He says Australia is still investing less than competitors, including China, India and OECD countries.
And while he welcomes increased spending on health and aged care he says investment in that area will not spawn new industries.
"I just don't see any investment in things that might drive the future prosperity of Australia," says Barlow.
He says there should have been more funding for the Australian Research Council, especially the council's  linkage grants, which have contributions from industry. 
Innovative capability not addressed
Bradley Smith, executive director of Federation of Australian Scientific and Technological Societies, agrees medical research is the big winner from the budget.
"The budget has quite a number of welcome one-off initiatives which support infrastructure at a handful of universities and medical research institutes," he says.
And he says there is a modest increase in research infrastructure for universities
But he says there is a lack of commitment to education and skills development.
"The overwhelming sense is there is still not a concerted effort by government to underpin the serious development of our innovative capability," says Smith.
Medical research gets 'A minus'
The budget committed an additional A$500 million over four years to the National Health and Medical Research Council, provided A$170 million for new health and medical research fellowships, A$22 million for stem cell research and over A$200 million in additional funding for medical research institutes.
"It's a start in the right direction," says Professor Kurt Lambeck, the new president of the Australian Academy of Science.
"As far as the medical research part is concerned I'd probably give it an 'A minus'," he says. "But other than medical there's really nothing in it that I can find."
"In particular what I find disappointing is that there is no long-term investment in people."
Lambeck says the new health and medical research fellowships may help stop the brain drain at the elite level, there is still a major problem for most research scientists once they finish their PhD and post-doctoral training.
Expenditure on infrastructure is one thing, says Lambeck: "But is it going to provide the intellect to drive that infrastructure?"
He says there should have been increased funding specifically for mid-career researchers, to provide the transition from the post-doctoral fellowships to long-term commitments.
Short term
And even medical researchers have reservations about the budget.
"Overall, this is a good budget for medical research in the short term," says Professor Bob Williamson of the University of Melbourne and Chair of the National Committee for Medicine of the Australian Academy of Science.
"The main concern that researchers will have is that, compared to Canada or European countries, we still do not use much of our wealth to create a strategic infrastructure in science, technology and education," he says.
"The right allocation of resources for the long term should be a high priority not only for the present generation, but to ensure health and wealth for Australia in the future."
Other allocations in the budget include:
&bull; A$500 million to restore the health of the Murray-Darling Basin
&bull; A$98.3 million over four years to deal with illegal foreign fishing
&bull; A$44.2 million over three years to strengthen defences against bird flu
&bull; A$16 million over four years to boost pest and disease preparedness
&bull; A$15.3 million over the next four years to upgrade Questacon national science and technology centre
&bull; A$3 million to help develop a Research Quality Framework for research funding and
&bull; A$1.5 million per year funding increase for Australian scientists collaborating on research projects with China.
