
We have the technology to clone animals and even humans, but what have we gained ten years after the first sheep was cloned from an adult cell?
This Wednesday marks ten years since a lamb named Dolly, born in Scotland, made international headlines as the globe's first cloned mammal.
She also triggered a storm of dreams, dread and ethical polemic that hasn't abated since.
A river of money and hope, directed into the quest for cures for cancer, heart degeneration, Alzheimer's and other crippling disease, has also flowed from the event. 
But there has been anguished debate, bitter opposition and the crafting of laws and guidelines to restrict or shape cloning research.
In Australia, a legislative review by former federal court judge John Lockhart last year recommended lawmakers lift the current ban on therapeutic cloning.
However, a number of government ministers oppose the recommendation and Prime Minister John Howard has promised a party room debate in August before a decision is made.
Questions have also been raised about what, exactly, scientists have achieved with the creation of Dolly.
"Where has Dolly taken us?" asks Sue Mayer, a doctor who is a member of GeneWatch UK, a British watchdog that monitors biotechnology. 
"The biggest worry is that she has taken us down a blind alley.
"Rather than tackling the root causes of disease, we are going for hype and quick fixes which may never deliver. 
"And she's opened this prospect of reproductive cloning, a door which scientists try to keep open but which we should firmly close."
Somatic cell nuclear transfer
The technique that led to Dolly is called somatic cell nuclear transfer and has remained essentially unchanged over the decade. 
A mammalian egg is taken, and its nucleus, the DNA program for making life,  is removed.
 The nucleus is replaced through a microscopic glass tube by the nucleus of a cell from the animal to be cloned. 
The reconstructed egg is then treated with a jolt of electricity and placed in a dish of nurturing chemicals to make it divide.
A few days later it becomes a cluster of cells big enough to be transplanted into the surrogate mother's uterus. 
Dolly, created at the Roslin Institute in Edinburgh, was named after Dolly Parton, the big-busted country and western singer, because the cell that was cloned came from a sheep's mammary gland. 
Her lab name, rather less media-friendly, was 6LL3.
 It later emerged that the same team, managed by Ian Wilmut, had previously created two sheep clones from embryonic cells.
So, strictly speaking, Dolly was the first mammal to be successfully cloned from an adult cell.
Not all good news
After this breakthrough, other cloned species swiftly followed: horses, bulls, pigs, mice, rats, rabbits, cats and dogs and others. 
But the miscarriage rate of transplanted eggs is extremely high, and of those embryos that make it to term, many have deformities or, as happened with Dolly, die prematurely, a clear warning to any scientist mad or foolish enough to try to make a cloned baby. 
 The suspected cause is that the genetic software isn't transferred entirely, or is somehow damaged in the transfer. 
As a result, the machinery malfunctions - genes don't switch on or off as they should in the complex ballet of making proteins.
So if cloning is frustrating, costly and potentially risky, why bother with it? 
The most alluring reason is medical. 
A cloned lab animal such as a mouse can provide a very useful standardised tool for experiment. 
And a farm animal that can be engineered and cloned to produce rare pharmaceutical proteins in its milk, Dolly was created with this in mind, could help save lives and ease suffering.
Embryonic stem cells and ethical firestorms
But the most glittering prize of all is to harness cloning to embryonic stem cells, the primitive master cells of early-stage embryos that famously have the power to develop into almost any tissue of the body.
Researchers believe embryonic stem cells can some day be coaxed into regenerative tissue that could repair brain cells, nerves, kidneys, livers and other organs damaged by disease.
So if these stemcells are copies of the patient's own DNA, they would not be rejected by the immune system.
But here comes the ethical firestorm. 
Some religious groups already oppose the use of human embryonic cells, saying that this tissue has the same value as a life.
Yet there is an added queasiness about human cloning that is shared by many others, even if the immediate goal is therapeutic and nothing is created beyond a tiny cluster of cells, a further step will have been taken towards baby cloning. 
At the moment, patient-specific embryonic stem cells remain beyond the horizon.
The only scientist to have claimed to have made them, South Korea's Hwang Woo-Suk, was unmasked in January as a fraud.
As for reproductive cloning, many countries introduced laws after a renegade sect, the Raelians, claimed in late 2002 to have produced the world's first cloned baby. 
That claim has never been independently confirmed or even examined, and most scientists scoff at it.
That said, many also predict that the first cloned human is only a matter of time. 
"The (reproductive cloning) laws that are in place are pretty well-established throughout the world, but there are also laws in place against murder and suicide," says James Bradley, a professor of cell and developmental biology at Auburn University in Alabama.
