
This mite came to a sticky end millions of years ago in the Peruvian Amazon
Insects that became trapped in tree resin between 12 and 15 million years ago show that Amazonia hosted an astonishingly rich variety of life, French researchers say. 
The resin, which hardened into glass-like amber, has yielded at least 13 previously unidentified species of insects, three species of mites as well as more than 30 new species of algae, lichen and other microorganisms.
A team led by Dr Pierre-Olivier Antoine at the University of Toulouse publishes the research online today in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
It is the third amber fossil find in South America, but the first in Amazonia. 
Of the 13 insect species, 12 belong to different families, which demonstrates that Amazonia was already hot, humid and a remarkable generator of biodiversity in the middle Miocene, an era that spanned 23 to about 5.3 million years ago, Antoine says.
Fossilised insects and microorganisms are extremely rare, as they do not have a tough internal skeleton like, for instance, dinosaurs, early birds or hominids.
As a result, these tiny fossils only turn up in exceptional finds, embedded in amber or in fine-grain chalky deposits. 
Three expeditions have been carried out to explore the amber deposit, which was found accidentally on the banks of the Amazon near the Peruvian city of Iquitos and is covered by river water for much of the year. 
About 100 fragments of amber, totalling around 500 grams have been recovered from the site and are still being analysed.
"To find so many species in such a small quantity of amber proves that at that time Amazonia had phenomenal biodiversity, close to today's," says Antoine. 
Some scientists have argued that Amazonia's broad variety of life was acquired relatively recently. 
The team, from France's National Centre for Scientific Research (CNRS), says that some of the specimens are so extraordinarily preserved that some cells appear to be undamaged. 
If so, there are hopes that enough DNA may be recovered from them to build a family tree of their genetic lineage, the CNRS says.
