
This mock-up illustrates the dangers foxes pose to penguins on Phillip Island
A drug that makes vixens neglect their cubs could help solve Australia's feral fox problem, researchers say.
They are looking at the drug cabergoline, which reduces fertility and interferes with maternal instincts, to see if it could control foxes on Phillip Island in Victoria.
The island is home to a renowned penguin colony and up to 150 unwanted foxes.
A fox can kill up to 30 penguins a night, says Dr Roger Kirkwood, a biologist at the Phillip Island Nature Park.
"We need to eradicate foxes from the island because just one fox can step in there and do so much damage," he says.
The foxes also feast on migratory mutton birds that visit the island, says Kirkwood.
He's working with University of Tasmania pharmacologist Professor Stuart McLean to study cabergoline.
In humans, the drug is used to treat Parkinson's disease.
But the scientists are interested in using the drug in foxes as it acts on the brain's dopamine receptors to block secretion of the hormone prolactin.
"[Foxes] rely on prolactin to become pregnant and maintain pregnancy and to lactate, and also for their mothering instinct after the cubs are born," says McLean. 
Because it suppresses maternal instincts, cabergoline makes vixens less likely to care for their cubs by bringing them food, grooming them and teaching them survival skills, which reduces their chances of survival.
The drug has not yet been tested on foxes on the island but preliminary research will be presented at the Australian Health and Medical Research Congress next month.
A study looking at how long cabergoline remains in fox bait has also been submitted to the journal Wildlife Research.
Toll on penguins
Kirkwood says if foxes are allowed to breed out of control they could destroy Phillip Island's 60,000 strong penguin population.
Foxes have already reduced the number of penguin colonies on Phillip Island from 12 to just one in the past 80 years.
More than 1000 foxes have been eliminated since the introduction of a control program on the island in 1980, which includes shooting, poisoning, fumigating dens and using dogs to hunt the foxes.
Kirkwood says although foxes only live about five years the population is resilient and recovers quickly.
"If we stopped our program we reckon the carrying capacity of the island would be over 400 foxes, and they would eliminate the penguins given time if we didn't control them," he says.
