
Dragonflies were as large as seagulls 300 million years ago, just before the dinosaurs came on the scene
The enormous dragonflies, millipedes and other insects that lived 300 million years ago grew so large because of Earth's rich oxygen supply at the time, according to a new study.
"Why isn't there a cockroach that ate Dallas from recent history?" asks co-author Professor Jon Harrison of Arizona State University. "We can answer that question without a time machine."
Harrison and his team analysed how modern insects are designed for the fact that air today is 21% oxygen.
They focused on the tracheal system, the interconnected tubes that transport oxygen throughout bug bodies.
By extension, the researchers envisioned what insects would have looked like millions of years ago when the air was 35% oxygen.
Their findings help to explain the remains of millipedes over a metre long, 10 centimetre cockroaches and dragonflies with 75 centimetre wingspans dating to the late Palaeozoic period, just before dinosaurs came on the scene.
Using x-ray imaging, the scientists compared the tracheal dimensions of four modern beetles ranging in size from 3 millimetres to 3.5 centimetres.
They found that the tracheal system took up 20% more of the insect's body in larger beetles. In other words, the bigger an insect, the more it must invest in air tubing.
And "more tracheae ... mean less space for everything else in the body, such as the brain and reproductive system", Harrison explains.
In the oxygen-rich world of the Palaeozoic era, insects needed less air to meet their oxygen needs. As a result, they could afford smaller trachea than modern insects. 
The researchers conclude that although Palaeozoic insects had the same basic body structure as modern insects, their maximum body size was larger because smaller trachea left more room for the other essential body parts necessary to sustain their weight.
The findings were presented at this week's American Physiological Society conference in Virginia Beach.
Dr Steve Heydon, curator and collections manager of the Bohart Museum of Entomology at University of California, Davis, says that the new explanation is plausible.
But there are other possible explanations for why insects grew smaller, such as competition pressure from birds.
"Remember that there weren't any birds in the sky when the giant insects were out," says Heydon. "When flying dinosaurs and birds came around, the insects lost their exclusivity."
