
Nacreous clouds seen as the fading light passes through tiny ice crystals blown along on strong jets of air
Rare, mother-of-pearl coloured clouds caused by extreme weather conditions above Antarctica are a possible indication of climate change, Australian scientists say.
Known as nacreous clouds, the spectacular formations showing delicate wisps of colours were photographed in the sky over an Australian meteorological base at Mawson station on 25 July. 
Australian Antarctic Division scientist Dr Andrew Klekociuk says such clouds are occasionally produced by air rising over Arctic and Antarctic mountains in high polar latitudes during winter.
"You have to be in the right part of the world in winter, and have the Sun just below your horizon to see them," he says. 
Nacreous clouds can only form in temperatures lower than -80&deg;C.
Australian Bureau of Meteorology officer Renae Baker says a weather balloon in the vicinity of the clouds in the stratosphere about 20 kilometres above the Earth's surface measured temperatures as low as -87&deg;C. 
"That's about as cold as the lowest temperatures ever recorded on the surface of the Earth," says Baker, who photographed the clouds.
Klekociuk, an atmospheric scientist, says the rarely seen clouds, also known as polar stratospheric clouds, are more than just a curiosity. 
"They reveal extreme conditions in the atmosphere, and promote chemical changes that lead to destruction of vital stratospheric ozone," he says. 
Klekociuk says temperatures in the stratosphere, between 8 and 50 kilometres above Earth, would be expected to drop as the planet warms.
Data collected over the past 25 years has reflected this, he told ABC Radio.
"Over that time there has been a small decrease in temperature and that change is actually occurring faster than the warming at the surface of the Earth," he says. 
The delicate cloud colours are created at sunset when fading light passes through tiny water-ice crystals blown along on strong jets of stratospheric air. 
Winds at the same height were measured blowing at almost 230 kilometres per hour, the scientists say.
Klekociuk says his colleagues and US researchers at the Davis station, 900 kilometres to the east of Mawson, are working together on research into what the strange clouds reveal about the atmosphere.
