
Charles Dickens wasn't a doctor but he learned from them, and they learned from him
Charles Dickens was so good at describing neurological disease in his characters that the symptoms were used word-for-word in medical text books of the day, says an Australian neurologist.
The 19th century novelist's interpretations of diseases of the nervous system even predated formal medical classification, some by more than a century.
In a paper to be published in the Journal of Clinical Neuroscience, Dr Kerrie Schoffer of the Austin Hospital in Melbourne says his observations have helped develop our modern understanding of neurological disorders.
"In Dickens's day, they didn't really understand much about these disorders, things like Tourette syndrome; there was no name for that and no understanding of the biological basis of it," she says. 
Yet Dickens described details in his novel David Copperfield.
His description of the tics, teeth grinding and grimaces of the character Mr Bell, now known as symptoms of Tourette syndrome, was published more than 40 years before Gilles de la Tourette clinically described the disorder in 1885.   
In The Pickwick Papers, Schoffer notes that Dickens links Parkinson's disease and dementia in an old man whose "limbs were shaking with disease and the palsy had fastened on his mind". 
Restless legs syndrome, a disorder characterised by the compelling need to move the legs, Schoffer observes, is strongly suggested in the sleepy waiter in David Copperfield.
He had "the fidgets in his legs, and was twisting them, and hitting them and putting them through all kinds of contortions in his small pantry". 
Schoffer says Dickens also had a keen eye for people unsteady on their feet, with involuntary muscle movement, tremors and sleep problems.
Dickens had little formal education let alone clinical training. But Schoffer says he had access to people with movement disorders through leading physicians of the day. 
"Dickens's rise to prominence as an author meant he interacted with high society, which tended to be prominent physicians," Schoffer says.
"If there's one thing that doctors and writers have in common it is that we both have to observe people very closely. I think Dickens's work is a great model for the interaction between medicine and literature."
