
Caulobacter crescentus uses its stalk to stick to solid objects
Harmless bacteria that live in rivers produce a biological superglue stronger than any ever measured, scientists say.
Researchers reporting recently in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, say the microorganism Caulobacter crescentus sticks to surfaces three to four times more strongly than synthetic superglue.
The bacteria holds the secret for understanding how to prevent harmful bacteria from sticking to human tissue and causing disease, the researchers say.
It also may help to produce a nontoxic superglue that could be used for anything from a dental adhesive, to an industrial glue that works underwater, to a surgical glue. 
"The advantage here is that these bacteria live in water and so they bind to all sorts of surfaces in water," says team member Yves Brun, professor of biology at Indiana University. "This means that this glue is very versatile." 
Biologists including Brun regularly study C. crescentus as a biological model for understanding how other bacteria function.
Over the course of other experiments, Brun realised the holding power of the tiny critters, which attach themselves to surfaces with a stalk-like appendage.
Genes for stickiness
To zero in on how they do it, Brun and his team began genetically manipulating the bacteria to remove specific genes needed to produce the adhesive. 
Eventually, the scientists realised that variations of C. crescentus lacking the genes required to produce chains of sugar molecules at the ends of the stalks could not hold fast to surfaces. 
The scientists determined that the polysaccharide is a critical component of the adhesive.
They think that the sugar molecules are attached to super-sticky proteins, but they have yet to confirm which ones. 
They also have indirect evidence that either there are other adhesive molecules involved or that the polysaccharide is somehow modified to make it stickier, says Brun.
How strong is the glue?
The researchers did, however, confirm just how tenacious the bacteria are.
Jay Tang, an assistant professor of physics at Brown University and his team stepped in to help measure the force required to pull the bacteria off a flexible glass pipette. 
The researchers found that a single bacterium could withstand a stress of 0.11 to 2.26 micronewtons.
In other words, the amount of bacteria that fit onto an Australian 20 cent piece (or a US quarter) could withstand being pulled by a force of four to five tonnes, about the mass of an adult elephant.
The team also found enzymes that work to unglue the bacteria from a surface.
"The work by the group at Brown is exciting in its implications for better understanding natural adhesives and also in possible translation to new synthetic adhesives," says Professor Dennis Discher of the Biophysics and Polymers Lab at the University of Pennsylvania. 
According to Brun, ultimately the bacteria would not be used as a glue itself, but to produce the adhesive.
Before that can happen, the scientists have to pinpoint the genes required and devise a method for getting the bacteria to produce the glue in large quantities.
