
Should the tropics move another two or three degrees poleward the Sahara Desert could shift perhaps several hundred kilometres towards the poles, the researchers say
The tropical regions of the world have been expanding since 1979, say US climatologists, who say it is unclear whether the phenomenon is caused by global warming. 
Dr Thomas Reichler, a meteorology professor at the University of Utah in Salt Lake City, and colleagues, report their findings in today's issue of the journal Science.
After analysing satellite temperature data collected between 1979 and 2005, researchers estimate that the tropics has expanded by two degrees of latitude, or 225 kilometres during that period. 
"It's a big deal," says Reichler. "The tropics may be expanding and getting larger."
The phenomenon could explain the increase in droughts and decrease in precipitation observed in recent years in the subtropical regions of southwestern United States and Europe's Mediterranean basin, the scientists say.
"The possible expansion of the tropics may be a totally new aspect of climate change," Reichler says. "We don't know for sure what triggered it." 
Besides global warming, another possible cause is the depletion of the stratospheric ozone layer due to pollutants such as refrigerant gases.
Jet streams play a key role
Meteorologists generally consider that the tropics lies between 30&deg;N and 30&deg;S.
Reichler and team found that in both hemispheres at these mid-latitudes, the lower atmosphere, or troposphere, has became warmer compared to other latitudes in the past 26 years, while the stratosphere has become cooler.
The researchers argue this change would have pushed each of the tropospheric jet streams - fast-moving wind currents that propel weather patterns - towards the poles.
"The jet streams mark the edge of the tropics, so if they are moving poleward that means the tropics are getting wider," says study co-author Dr John Wallace, an atmospheric sciences professor at the University of Washington in Seattle.
He says movement of the jet streams will have long-term impact on rainfall.
Should the tropics "move another two or three degrees poleward in this century," says Wallace, "very dry areas such as the Sahara Desert could nudge farther toward the pole, perhaps by a few hundred miles." 
Measurements
Reichler says the team used long satellite measurements of atmospheric temperatures to find the distinct pattern of warming. 
Weather balloons also provided independent confirmation of the satellite observation, he says.
The researchers say the mid-latitude tropospheric warming trend remained even after excluding the record mid-latitude temperatures in 1998, caused by the 1997 El Nino.
