
This binary system regularly emits the most energetic gamma rays ever observed. The system consists of a huge star and a compact object, possibly a black hole
Astronomers have discovered an 'orbital clock' in the Milky Way, a gamma ray source 100,000 times more energetic than any other.
The repeated emission comes from a binary system where a compact object, possibly a small black hole, orbits a massive star about every 4 days.  
An international team of scientists reports its findings in the Journal of Astronomy and Astrophysics. 
Very High Energy (VHE) gamma rays in this system are produced when particles are accelerated to move at close to the speed of light.
This happens when particles from the strong stellar wind collide with particles from the compact object.
But the process is reversed when the gamma rays meet the intense ultraviolet light radiated by the star, and are absorbed. 
It is the production, then absorption, of the gamma rays that is responsible for complex variations in the signal.
The signal is strongest when the compact object is in front of the star and weakest when it is behind it.  
"This is the first time we've been able to identify this orbital variation in a high energy gamma ray source and it allows us to probe to much greater depth the astrophysics of gamma ray production and absorption," says Australian co-author Dr Gavin Rowell from the University of Adelaide. 
Neither the production nor the absorption processes are well understood. VHE gamma ray emission is rare and the object is one of just 30 such sources discovered in the past few years.
It is also the only one where the intensity of the emission changes in a regular fashion.
Rowell says a number of factors are involved in the signal's periodic patterns.
These include geometric effects relating to the orientation of the compact object to the star and the angle at which the system is seen from Earth.
"There is lots of interaction between events which leads to the flux profile we see.  The rules are quite simple but separating the influences of changes in the magnetic field, the intensity of the stellar wind and mechanisms contributing to particle acceleration and absorption is difficult," Rowell says.
"Orbital signatures like this are useful keys. They act as a probe of the changing environment as the compact object moves along its orbit and give a useful insight into how gamma rays are produced and what happens to them."
The source was detected as part of a survey of VHE gamma ray sources in the southern sky using the most sensitive ground based gamma ray detector, the High Energy Spectroscopic System in Namibia, southwest Africa.
