
People have until 1 May to have their say in Australia's national nanotechnology strategy
The Australian public is being left out of crucial decisions on nanotechnology that will affect their future health, environmental, social and economic wellbeing, says an environmental group.
The Friends of the Earth (FOE) says the government taskforce charged with developing a national nanotechnology plan is treating public input as a "tokenistic add-on" rather than something that should help shape Australia's response to the technology.
The government has given the public the month of April to make submissions to its nanotechnology strategy. But FOE says this is not enough.
"Public awareness of nanotechnology is so low that this is a really inappropriate way for [the taskforce] to be seeking public involvement," says  Georgia Miller of FOE's nanotechnology project.
FOE wants a public education campaign on nanotechnology, public meetings and consensus conferences or other processes to involve a broader range of the public.
Miller says the process should be independently funded and run by a steering group of representatives from all parts of society likely to be affected by nanotechnology.
"This isn't a radical suggestion," she says. "This is something along the lines of what the UK government has already set up to oversee its public engagement process on nanotechnology."
Miller says unions, environmental, public health, farming, disability rights, consumer and civil liberties groups should be involved in developing the strategy. But she says the taskforce has had only "ad hoc" contact with groups other than those from science and industry.
Discussion paper lacking
The National Nanotechnology Strategy Taskforce, the body within the federal industry department charged with developing Australia's nanotechnology plan, issued a discussion paper for public comment.  
But Miller says this discussion paper "trivialises" the potential risks of nanotechnology, which she says is already widely used unlabelled and untested in commercial products.
She says bodies like the UK Royal Society have recommended nanomaterials be assessed as new products but the paper makes no mention of legislation to manage any risks.
Miller also says the paper should have mentioned efforts by researchers to enhance humans, by combining nanotechnology with biotechnology, information technology and cognitive science.
And she says it should have recognised the economic impact of nanomaterials.
"Carbon nanofibres may displace cotton but this isn't even mentioned and this would have huge impacts for Australia," she says.
Extensive consultation
David Gallagher, general manager of the National Nanotechnology Strategy Taskforce, says surveys show there is a low level of public knowledge about nanotechnology but that is not surprising.
He agrees the discussion document is limited, for example on health and safety issues, but says it was only designed to be a starting point for public comment.
"The point of the public process is to determine if people believe health and safety is an issue, and if it is why," he says.
A spokesperson for industry minister Ian Macfarlane says the taskforce is undertaking "extensive consultation" with industry, science and community groups to develop the strategy.
"The government recognises that public engagement is not a 'one off' process," the spokesperson says. 
"It is likely that options for a national nanotechnology strategy will place priority on the need for ongoing effective public engagement, awareness and debate - much in the same way as has been done with biotechnology."
Balancing act
Nanomaterials researcher Professor Chennupati Jagadish, who convenes of the Australian Research Council Nanotechnology Network and has also advised the taskforce, says public engagement is "absolutely essential".
But he says it's a "balancing act" because Australia needs the national strategy so it can be competitive internationally.
"Time is also of the essence," says Jagadish, who is based at the Australian National University in Canberra.
Australian Council of Trade Unions occupational health and safety officer Steve Mullins says he sees the strategy discussion paper as the beginning of the process to raise public awareness about nanotechnology, not the end.
"There is a very real risk that environmental and health and safety concerns will be sidelined by government and business in their enthusiasm to develop the industry in Australia," he says.
The taskforce is due to report to the minister in June.
