
Imaginary playmates are a sign of a rich fantasy life, but can also hint at problems, researchers say
Children with imaginary friends have more vivid daydreams than other children, a new study shows for the first time.
Australian researcher Dr Paula Bouldin of Deakin University shows that children with imaginary friends also tend to have more "mythical content" in their dreams.
They spend more time daydreaming and have an ability to "almost ... see and hear the contents of their daydream in front of them".
It may appear obvious that children with imaginary friends have a richer fantasy life than those without, but to date there has been little specific research into the area.
Bouldin says her work, reported in the Journal of Genetic Psychology, finally provides evidence of this.
She questioned 74 children aged between three and eight, half with a current or past imaginary friend.
The group with imaginary friends reported more mythical content in their dreams, had more frequent and more vivid daydreams and were more likely to play games with a mythical content.
When imaginary friends turn nasty
Dr Louise Newman, a child psychiatrist and the director of the New South Wales Institute of Psychiatry, says the study confirms what has long been suspected.
But she says further research needs to look at the psychological and emotional function of imaginary friends.
Newman says while some imaginary friends function as sort of "super peers" or the "perfect playmate" they can also be a sign of emotional disturbance.
"There are some cases in which children have those companions because they might be lonely, distressed or unable to put into words things that are concerning them," she says.
"Some friends ... can be quite persecutory or frightening, they might torment the child, or express doubts, tell them they're stupid or bad."
Newman says while imaginary friends are quite common in younger ages, they are more likely to be associated with emotional or family problems in children over the age of about seven.
Adults with imaginary friends
Most children grow out of imaginary friends, Newman says. But in some cases an imaginary friend can emerge in adulthood, usually in response to trauma, inability to cope with stress and sometimes psychotic illness.
 In rare cases some adults develop what's known as Doppelganger syndrome, which occurs when they believe a twin or invisible friend accompanies them.
"Other people believe in angels and guardian angels, and they don't think there's anything out of the ordinary about that," she says.
Bouldin says her study suggests children with imaginary friends can readily access fantasy themes and may develop sophisticated information processing skills.
But she says it could also be that children with imaginary friends are simply more willing to discuss their fantasies than those without.
