
This year's ozone loss can be explained by the temperatures above Antarctica reaching the lowest recorded in the area since 1979
Antarctica in 2006 suffered its highest recorded single-year loss in ozone, says the European Space Agency.
Ozone measurements made by the agency's Envisat satellite shows a loss of 40 million tonnes on 2 October, exceeding the previous record of 39 million tonnes set in 2000.
Ozone loss is calculated by measuring the area and depth of the so-called ozone hole in the stratosphere, about 25 kilometres above Earth's surface.
This year's ozone hole measures 28 million square kilometres, which is nearly as large as in 2000, and the depth of the ozone hole is 100 Dobson units, a measurement of the thickness of the layer, which rivals a record set in 1990, the agency says. 
Ozone filters out dangerous ultraviolet rays from the Sun that damage vegetation and can cause skin cancer and cataracts. 
The layer has been badly damaged by industrial chemicals, especially chlorine and chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), scientists say.
The chemical reaction that thins ozone reaches its peak with colder high altitude temperatures in the southern hemisphere winter.
"Such significant ozone loss requires very low temperatures in the stratosphere combined with sunlight," says the agency's atmospheric engineer Dr Claus Zehner. 
"This year's extreme loss of ozone can be explained by the temperatures above Antarctica reaching the lowest recorded in the area since 1979." 
Last week, the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) gave notice that the seasonal ozone hole in 2006 was heading for a record. 
The ozone level globally has lowered by 0.3% a year over the past decade. 
CFCs, mainly aerosol gases and refrigerants, and other ozone destroyers were  controlled by an international treaty, the Montreal Protocol signed in September 1987. 
But there is already so much of the pollution stored in the atmosphere that large ozone holes are expected to persist for the next couple of decades, the WMO says. 
The ozone layer over the Antarctic will only be completely replenished 15 years later than predicted, by 2065, according to the WMO and UN Environment Programme. 
Ozone in the stratosphere is protective. At ground level, though, ozone, as a chemical reaction between exhaust fumes and sunlight, is a pollutant that can be dangerous for people with bad respiratory or heart problems.
