
This new type of brain-machine interface could replace joysticks in online gaming or be used as a communication tool for pople who cannot speak or sign
A computerised keyboard that translates electrical impulses from brainwave signals into letters and words could be available in the next five years, German researchers say.
In the short term, the technology will allow its developers, from the Fraunhofer Institute and the Charit&eacute; University Hospital in Berlin to watch a brain function in real time. 
But in the long term, such a brain-machine interface could replace the joystick in electronic gaming or serve as a communication tool for people unable to speak or sign. 
"We are dreaming of something like a baseball cap with electrodes in the cap that can measure the brainwaves," says one of the scientists behind the project Professor Klaus-Robert M&uuml;ller of the Fraunhofer Institute. 
"People could just put on the cap and have a wireless connection from these electrodes to a computer and they can play video games." 
Measuring brainwaves
That vision, says M&uuml;ller, will require advances in electrode technology that allow the tiny, metal sensors to pick up electric signals from brainwave activity without making contact with the skin. 
For now, M&uuml;ller and his colleagues are still somewhat constrained by the conventional electrode cap, which looks like a swimmer's cap embedded with 64 or 128 contact points and a web of wires leading to a computer. 
Each electrode embedded in the cap must be smeared with a conductive gel before the cap is fitted properly to a person's head, a process that can take 30 minutes to an hour. 
M&uuml;ller and his team's technology involves special software. 
Once the electrode cap is in place, the person must calibrate the computer to their individual brainwaves. 
Whereas other research projects may require a person to spend 100 hours practising with the machine before calibration is finalised, the Fraunhofer system takes only 5 minutes. 
"The Berlin group is very strong and focused on the computer learning the pattern," says Robert Leeb, a brain-computer interface researcher at Graz University of Technology in Austria. 
Leeb works in a team developing a machine that propels a person through a virtual environment based on brain signals. 
Imagine moving your hand
During calibration with the Berlin group's technology, the person imagines moving his left or right hand.
The signals picked up by the electrodes are processed in a specially written computer program that filters out signals from thoughts not related to moving the object and homes in on the brain activity responsible for the imagination of movements. 
Once the person is in sync with the computer, he can imagine moving his hands or feet or rotating an object to trigger an action on the screen. 
"In the brain, there is one specific area on the cortex that is active during left hand motor imagery and another one that is active during right hand motor imagery," says team member Dr Benjamin Blankertz. 
"These mental tasks are discriminated by their brain activity patterns and can thus be used for brain-computer interface control."
Additional computer screens present various data indicating brain activity, which the team monitors closely. 
The researchers' goal is to capture and display many more psychological measures, such as those that reveal cognitive workload, attention, stress and vigilance. 
The work could open the door on a wealth of information about how the brain functions, not to mention improve how it controls images on-screen with just a thought, the researchers say.
