
ANSTO says the radiation released from its site was well within regulatory limits and will not affect the health of workers or the community
The operator of Australia's only nuclear reactor has rejected claims that radioactivity released from its site raises safety concerns.
The opposition Labor party claims the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation (ANSTO) has withheld details about an accident at the Lucas Heights facility in Sydney last week.
A pipe inside a "hot cell" used to produce medical isotopes ruptured last Thursday evening disrupting production of radiopharmaceutical technetium-99n, used in the scanning of bones and organs. 
"Only one worker was in the vicinity of the incident, but after examination he has been found not to have received any radiation dose," ANSTO said in a release at the time.
"No measurable contamination was found outside the immediate area where the incident occurred, and there are no off-site consequences."
But shadow minister for science and research, Jenny Macklin, said yesterday she had obtained an internal email from ANSTO that contained information not previously released by the organisation.
The email said a small amount of radioactive gases (xenon and krypton) had been released through the stack and the worker involved had received a very small amount of contamination.
The email said the radiation was quickly washed off the worker and a whole body monitor examination confirmed that he received no internal radiation exposure.
"Trivial" incident
In a follow-up statement this week ANSTO rejected Macklin's claims that it had not made relevant information about the incident public.
ANSTO described the incident as "trivial", although said it had nonetheless informed the regulator, the Australian Radiation Protection and Nuclear Safety Agency.
Small amounts of radioactive gases are routinely released during radiopharmaceutical manufacture, and reported to the public via ANSTO's annual Environmental Reports, ANSTO said.
It also said that while the doses received by the public as a result of those releases are so low as not to be directly measurable, they can be calculated.
The total maximum annual estimated dose to a member of the public from those releases is only a very small fraction of the radiation dose received by everyone each year from naturally-occurring sources of radiation, ANSTO said.
"The releases which occurred last Thursday evening were not outside the normal release pattern, were well within regulatory limits and could not be detected off-site," the statement said.
Nuclear debate
Australia holds about 40% of the world's known uranium reserves and is a major exporter of the material.
There is currently debate in Australia over government investigations into whether to set up a nuclear power and enrichment industry in the country.
"Accidents like this show that the community is right to be concerned about the safety of nuclear reactors," Macklin said. "This accident is a stark reminder that things can go wrong with nuclear reactors." 
But ANSTO rejected Macklin's linking of last week's incident with nuclear reactor safety.
"The incident did not occur in the reactor, and has nothing to do with reactor safety," it said.
"This is just deliberate scare-mongering by Labor in relation to a medical research reactor that delivers radioisotopes and radiopharmaceuticals to cancer patients across Australia," science minister, Julie Bishop told ABC Radio News.
The 48-year-old Lucas Heights plant is Australia's only nuclear reactor and produces radioisotopes for use in more than 440,000 nuclear medicine procedures each year.
