
A Botai village, with its horse yards, would have looked like this
Evidence from soil inside the remains of a 5600-year-old horse yard indicates that the ancient Botai people of Kazakhstan were among the earliest to domesticate horses. 
But the Botai probably ate and milked their horses as often as they rode them. 
The horse yards are part of an archaeological site in northern Kazakhstan known as Krasnyi Yar.
This was once a large village occupied by the Copper Age Botai, says Dr Sandra Olsen, curator at the Carnegie Museum of Natural History in Pittsburgh, who leads a team that has been investigating horse domestication for years.
Associate Professor Rosemary Capo, a geologist colleague from the University of Pittsburgh, presented some of the soil evidence for horses this week at a Geological Society of America meeting in Philadelphia. 
"We really don't understand any major signs of changes in horses with domestication," says Dr Melinda Zeder, an archaeologist at the Smithsonian Institution who specialises in the origins of animal and plant domestication. 
Zeder refers to physical changes in horse bones from ancient middens.
Nor, so far, is there a direct way to determine what people were doing with their horses that early on, she says.
For these reasons she and her colleagues have been building their case with less direct evidence.
"Here's an approach to documenting horse domestication that's extremely new," says Zeder, of the evidence presented at the conference. "Sort of like Perry Mason, they're building circumstantial evidence."
That evidence comes from circular arrangements of posts and the soil differences found inside and outside the horse yard.
Comparing soils
Inside the yard, the soil contained up to 10 times the phosphorus as outside soils, but lower concentrations of nitrogen. That's what you'd expect if the soil inside the yard was enriched with horse manure.
Modern horse manure, for comparison, is loaded with phosphorous, potassium and nitrogen. The nitrogen is the easiest to lose to groundwater or the air. 
Phosphorus, on the other hand, can be held in place by calcium and iron, says Capo, one of the scientists who analysed the soil.
"High phosphorous could also indicate human occupation," says Capo. "But that's usually accompanied by other geochemical signatures, which we didn't find in the [horse yard] samples." 
There was also high sodium concentration in the horse yard samples, which could be from urine, suggests Olsen.
Smoking gun
The real smoking gun, says Olsen, will be if they can detect long-lived molecules of fat in these samples that can be attributed specifically to horses. That analysis is now being arranged.
So what were the Botai doing with those horses?
Olsen says they probably ate them and used them as pack animals. They may also have milked the mares to create a vitamin-rich, mildly alcoholic beverage that's still consumed today in Kazakhstan.
