
Carp make up to 90% of fish biomass in some Australian rivers, putting pressure on native fish
Australian carp may have originated from Germany, according to preliminary results from a genetic study.
The researchers say their findings, from the largest and technically sophisticated genetic study of carp in Australia, is also beginning to shed light on what caused them to become the cane toads of the country's rivers.
University of Sydney PhD student Gwilym Haynes has been working with the New South Wales Department of Primary Industries and CSIRO to sample carp from every major river in the Murray-Darling basin, as well as coastal rivers, and from Japan, Russia and Germany.
By analysing nuclear and mitochondrial DNA he's tracing the history of the freshwater pest's invasion.
The preliminary results were presented at the 11th Congress of Human Genetics in Brisbane this week.
"The Australian carp cluster to the German carp which indicates they have mostly German ancestry," he says.
Boolarra carp
Carp, Cyprinus carpio, were first introduced to southeastern Australia in the late 1800s but didn't become a problem until a fish farmer released a particularly robust strain in the town of Boolarra, in Victoria, in the early 1960s.
Haynes' research suggests the Boolarra strain bred with existing koi, or Japanese carp, from earlier releases and began their colonisation of the southeastern waterways.
The study could also resolve the question of whether the Boolarra strain was illegally imported or obtained locally from a population in the Prospect Reservoir in New South Wales.
"The official story is that they came from Prospect but other people say they were imported from Europe," Haynes says.
"It does look like the strain which is supposedly responsible for the carp being so widespread was European and didn't need a lot of input from the Asian carp to do well.
"It implies that the carp were probably well adapted when they got to Australia and didn't need to breed with the other Australians to do well."
Almost everywhere
Carp are currently established in every Australian state and territory except the Northern Territory. 
They pose a serious problem in Australian waterways, where they can make up to 90% of fish biomass in the rivers, putting pressure on native fish.
Haynes says carp are likely to remain a pest and "will certainly establish themselves in new regions".
Understanding their genetics will make them easier to control, he says.
"There is significant genetic differentiation within regions in Australia, and this has implications for carp management," he says.
"These regions should probably be managed separately to get the best result."
