
An artificial nose may one day help doctors sniff out disease
Doctors in the future may sniff patients with an electronic "nose" to detect telltale odours released as a result of disease and illness.
The technology replicates human and animal olfactory systems, according to a recent announcement by the European Union Information Society's Technologies Program.
The mechanical sniffer, currently undergoing development and testing, could dramatically change how doctors diagnose illness.
The technology behind the device was inspired by the human nose, but its effectiveness is comparable to more sensitive animal noses.
"The human nose is not especially well suited for odour recognition, as compared to the noses of dogs or rats," says Professor &Oacute;scar Ruiz, who is working on the project.
Ruiz, from the Department of Electronics at the University of Barcelona, Spain, says "There are some groups in the world that have trained dogs to diagnose some diseases like melanoma or prostate cancer in urine."
He says the sniffing device would do something similar, only it would use bioelectric sensors.
Sniffing out skin cancer
The gadget consists of a layer of proteins, designed to mimic natural olfactory receptors, placed on a gold microelectrode mounted on a two-millimetre-long computer chip.
One end of the chip is immersed in a liquid cell containing additional microelectrodes, all of which connect to an instrument that measures electrochemical changes.
At present, the researchers are pumping odour-causing chemicals into the liquid cell to record the signature spectrums that result when the nose receptors encounter them.
Skin cancer cells, for example, create distinctive electrochemical patterns, as do bacterial infections, failing organs and other tissue cells, even when they are healthy.
So far, the researchers have worked with an olfactory receptor protein from rats and one from humans.
The proposed electronic nose will need several hundred of such proteins to detect multiple smells.
The human nose, for example, uses 1,000 different proteins that enable the brain to perceive approximately 10,000 different smells.
In humans, however, the brain cannot seem to keep up with the nose.
"The brain gets trained to recognise different odours but, of course, many of them are never recognised," Ruiz says.
The evolution of smell
Our hominid and ape ancestors actually had more keen noses, since they relied more upon their sense of smell for mating, socialising, detecting predators, finding food and other tasks.
Scientists at the Weizmann Institute in Rehovot, Israel, have found that many genes for smell in humans were turned off permanently over the course of our evolution, although the DNA continues to exist as inactive "pseudogenes".
Ruiz and his team suggest that the electronic nose will return some of these smelling skills to us.
The invention may even improve upon nature, at least in terms of precision and reliability.
"We think that a commercial prototype could be available in between five and 10 years, although there are still some important issues to be solved," he says.
"Initially we expect that the devices will work with body fluids like urine or blood."
