
Erosion can affect the rate at which mountains in New Zealand grow, says a researcher
Mountains eroded by the wind and rain can actually grow larger, according to a Canadian geophysicist.
Associate Professor Russell Pysklywec of the University of Toronto says he is the first to predict that events on the Earth's surface can affect geological processes hundreds of kilometres below.
Pysklywec publishes his research on how erosion affects the way tectonic plates collide to form mountains in the current issue of the journal Geology.
Mountains form in a number of ways, including subduction, when two plates collide and the edge of one plate slides under the other, pushing up the crust in the process.
Eventually these mountains "clog up" the subduction zone, Pysklywec says, and change the way the plates collide so the subduction zone shifts elsewhere.
Over time, the original mountains start to erode as new mountains form elsewhere in the new subduction zone.
But when wind and rain wash away the material pushed up at the subduction zone, Pysklywec says the subduction zone does not get clogged up and this makes it easier for the mountains to keep growing there.
He says this is a paradox. After all, you'd expect erosion to wear down mountains, not build them up. 
He says the rate of erosion is critical.
"Erosion doesn't really lower mountains very much because typically the erosion occurs at the same rate or less than the rate of plate convergence," says Pysklywec, who has developed a computer model to simulate what happens.
Natural laboratory
Pysklywec studied the Southern Alps of New Zealand, which have been forming with the collision of the Pacific and Australian plates, a process that began 5 million years ago.
He says these mountains are the perfect "natural laboratory" for studying mountain-building because they are relatively young, which makes it easier to decipher the geological processes that are going on.
But, Pysklywec says, his findings apply to any area of the world where plates  collide and mountains form.
He says the effect of erosion on deep earth processes has been ignored because it is hard to imagine how erosion, which typically removes 1 centimetre of surface soil per year can affect 100-kilometre-thick tectonic plates.
"But you have to multiply that by 5 million years," he says. "And all of a sudden it's not 1 centimetre of material, it's tens of kilometres of material that you're taking away."
A hot topic in tectonics
Australian geophysicist, Dr Wouter Schellart of the Australian National University in Canberra says researchers have been studying the effect of erosion on tectonic processes. But geologists are debating what effect it has.
Previous research has focused on the first 30 kilometres of the Earth's crust, he says. But Pysklywec's research shows erosion can impact processes deep down as far as a few hundred kilometres.
Yet Schellart wonders whether this latest research applies to mountains other than those in New Zealand.
And he says the model doesn't account for where eroded sediment is deposited.
"In real life it's normally deposited right in front of the mountain belt," he says, adding that this will push both plates downwards.
He also says the rocks making up the Earth's crust in Pysklywec's model are weaker than they should be, which potentially overestimates the effect of erosion.
