
Caffeine is more likely to disrupt a daytime snooze than a normal night's sleep
Shiftworkers or people with jet lag who drink coffee to keep themselves awake may not be able to catnap the next day, say Canadian researchers.
They report online in the journal Neuropsychopharmacology that caffeine has a stronger disruptive effect on daytime, catch-up sleep after a night of sleep deprivation than it does on a normal night's sleep.
"Recent studies have suggested that caffeine is a measure of choice to counteract the effects of sleep deprivation on alertness and performance," say Dr Julie Carrier of Montreal's Sacred Heart Hospital and colleagues. 
"Our results suggest that this recommendation should be made with caution since using caffeine before sleeping at an abnormal circadian phase, such as during night work, might have more adverse consequences on sleep quality than before sleeping at a normal circadian time." 
Drinking caffeine at night is known to make it more difficult to fall asleep and to worsen sleep quality, Carrier and her team note.
They hypothesised that caffeine would have an even stronger effect when people were trying to recover from sleep deprivation by snoozing during the day.
To investigate, they asked 34 people drink caffeine or placebo before going to sleep at their normal bedtime.
A month later, the same people were deprived of sleep for an entire night. They were then told to fall asleep an hour after their normal wake-up time, after being given placebo or caffeine.
People received 100 milligrams of caffeine or placebo before their scheduled morning or evening bedtime, and then another 100 milligrams (or placebo) one hour before.
Sleeping after caffeine
All study participants who took caffeine took longer to fall asleep and spent more time in lighter stage 1 sleep and less time in deeper stage 2 and slow-wave sleep, the researchers found.
But people given caffeine before daytime sleep took even longer to drop off, and also slept for a shorter total time and had less REM sleep. Caffeine didn't affect night time sleep duration or REM. 
Carrier and her colleagues suggest that the greater daytime effects of caffeine are due to the fact that people are trying to fall asleep at a time when their body clock is telling them to stay awake, even though they are sleep-deprived.
Slow-wave sleep is known to last longer during daytime, catch-up sleep, they add, which normally helps override this circadian signal.
Given that caffeine reduces slow-wave sleep, it appears to allow the wake-up call to remain strong.
