
Will new copyright laws protect online artists?
The federal government's proposed changes to Australian copyright law fail to address issues facing digital artists, experts say.
Attorney general Philip Ruddock announced the reforms this week, saying they would make the law fairer for consumers and tougher on copyright pirates.
But Damien O'Brien of the Queensland University of Technology law school, says the revised laws profess, but essentially fail, to keep track with developing technologies and emerging markets.
"It doesn't look like they're very radical at all," he says. "They seem fairly conservative."
He says the new laws will let people tape their favourite TV show or download music onto their MP3 players.
But he says they won't make life any easier for the creators of so-called internet and video mashups, which combine content from a number of different sources to produce something new.
O'Brien, who has co-authored a paper called Mashups, Remixes and Copyright Law published on the university website, says most mashups made by unauthorised use of copyright material will remain illegal under the proposed laws.
Mashups are an example of remix culture, which has roots in the postmodern tendency to cannibalise texts from various sources and is being driven by technology that makes this easier to do than ever before.
For example a website could combine music from one source with images from another source and a search function from somewhere else.
Mashups are common in music videos and websites. For example, pop star Kylie Minogue has used legal mashups in her music videos while the website ChicagoCrime mixes police data with Google maps.
Meanwhile, the iSpecies search links data from GenBank, academic literature from Google Scholar and images from Yahoo image search.
"The challenge ... is the extent to which mashup and remix artists should be allowed to borrow, in a seamless manner, from the past to create the future," O'Brien writes in his paper. 
"For the first time in history creativity ... is subject to regulation."
Professor Matthew Rimmer, an expert in copyright law at the Australian National University, agrees the proposed laws don't do much to address issues in the latest technologies.
He says the changes go some way to recognising the use of copyright works for critique and humour.
"But it's not a carte blanche," he says.
O'Brien says it's disappointing that the reforms didn't include an open-ended "fair use" clause, which would be one way of mashup artists and others using copyright material legally.
Creative commons and mashup guilds
One way to address restrictions placed on mashup artists is through the concept of a creative common, says Jessica Coates of the creative commons project run from Queensland University of Technology.
Under the concept, artists can license their work for use in certain ways, including a mashup.
"The idea is that [licences] can be used by owners to make their work more widely available," Coates says.
"If you're trying to do innovation in a digital realm it can be very hard because you're using reproductions all the time ... so the idea with a creative common licence is to try to get material out into the common realm as long as it isn't used for commercial purposes."
Mashup guilds are another solution, says O'Brien.
"Mashup artists can form guilds to protect themselves against copyright holders who threaten to sue them," he says.
"It's the idea that if they form a group they can try and counterbalance the threat of litigation."
Testing the bounds
Rimmer says mashup artists may enjoy operating on the fringes of the law.
"One reason that mashups have attracted such interest and popular acclaim is that they partly depend on the illegality, they depend on breaching the normal controls," he says.
"There are always going to be people who don't seek permission and there's always going to be an innovative culture going on beyond the limits of the law."
A draft bill including the reforms will be released shortly, the government says.
