
Seb the German shepherd smells sheep poo for a living
A sniffer dog has been trained to tell which sheep have parasitic worms, Australian researchers show.
The dog's skills will be used to develop an electronic handheld 'sniffer' device to detect gastrointestinal nematodes in sheep.
The parasite detection initiative has the potential to save the Australian sheep industry millions of dollars a year, say agricultural scientists at Melbourne's La Trobe University.
Internal parasites are a constant headache for sheep farmers because they cause serious production losses.
They can interfere with a sheep's wool and meat growth, and make the animal weak and susceptible to other diseases. They can even kill.
Anti-parasitic drugs have been the weapon of choice for a number of years, however many parasites have become resistant to the drugs.
So the researchers tried something different.
"Scents, and the use of sniffer dogs to detect them, are used to determine the presence of a number of substances," says chief investigator Associate Professor Mark Sandeman. 
"So we set out to ascertain whether the presence of intestinal parasites in sheep could be detected by their scent."
It seems they can, with Seb the female German shepherd being trained to detect parasite-infected sheep droppings by its odour with 80-90% accuracy.
"We used [Seb] in a classic training sense; just as dogs are trained to detect drugs at airports, we trained [Seb] to detect parasites," he says.
Bags of infested poo were placed among bags of non-infested poo and Seb was trained to pick out the infested sample.
The whiff of parasites
Sandeman says it is too early to say exactly which chemicals, or groups of chemicals Seb is sniffing out.
"We don't know exactly what the dog is sniffing but we're picking up some differences in terms of chemical signatures that would suggest there are a number of different compounds that are changed between infected and uninfected sheep," he says.
The researchers are now working on developing an electronic handheld 'sniffer' device similar to those used in the food manufacturing industry. 
They are confident they will have a prototype within five years.
"We thought about training dogs to use on farms, but [there were many] technical difficulties. So instead we thought it would be better to have some small device that farmers could use," Sandeman says.
He envisages a farmer holding the sniffer device near the rear end of sheep or near poo.
Eventually, the detector might be refined using biosensor technology and sheep may be checked automatically for parasites, he says.
The Australian Sheep Industry CRC is funding the work.
