
Your music would be grouped in 'islands', which you could see on a screen. The more jazz in your collection, for example, the steeper the contours of the jazz island. And when you hover over the island, you'd see a list of songs floating like clouds
Music fans are downloading digital music and storing hundreds, if not thousands, of songs onto smaller and smaller devices.
Yet organising those songs remains a throw back to the days of vinyl, an uninspired structure of artist, album or track.
Researchers have now developed a program that automatically organises a collection of digital music files into a virtual landscape.
Instead of digging deeper and deeper through categories and subcategories of songs, you fly over an archipelago of sound-specific islands.
"It could work like a flight simulator," says Peter Knees, a PhD candidate and project assistant at Johannes Kepler University in Linz, Austria.
"You see landmarks that relate to style. If you dive deeper, it will reveal artists and then deeper to see individual songs."
Such a visual experience with digital files could fuel the music industry in new ways, says Ichiro Fujinaga, associate professor at the Schulich School of Music at McGill University in Montreal, who is not associated with the research.
"Good solutions may allow vendors to sell more music," he says.
So far, the solution Knees and his team propose organises about 500 music files. It's capable of analysing tens of thousands, but the researchers are keeping things simple while they make refinements.
The software analyses certain features from the audio signal, such as how much bass or treble exists and sound patterns that have to do with rhythm and tempo. Then the program clusters similar sounding pieces into regions of music.
The more similar pieces the user owns - let's say, Latin jazz - the higher the terrain on the Latin jazz island.
The user flies over the landscape using a joystick. As she approaches an island, she will hear an auditory impression of the musical style of the region. She also sees song titles, artist names, and even images floating like little clouds above the landscape.
If she wants to hear a specific song, she simply hovers over it. Or if she wants to hear anything from Latin jazz, she hovers over the region.
There are some things the software doesn't address, Fuinaga points out, such as the user's profile (is she a teenager or an opera buff?) or the listening context (is the person driving, showering on a date?).
And as good as any 3D music interface might be, some people are still sceptical about whether it's really necessary. But then, is a US$500 mp3 player really necessary?
Knees and his team are currently developing the program for a public exhibition at an Austrian science museum that specialises in new media technology.
Museum goers will be able to play with music files already stored in the computer or download their own files to see what their collection looks like.
