
Where people live will have a big impact on how technology will affect their lives, says a new report that highlights the technological divide
Australia is among countries that will gain the most from technology by 2020, a study finds. But poorer countries look to miss out.
The RAND Corporation study finds that it is countries that are already on technology's cutting edge, not those that are currently lagging in technological advances, which will benefit the most.
"Where people live will have a big impact on how technology applications affect their personal health and standard of living, and will also play a part in determining the ability of their countries to protect them and their environment," says Dr Richard Silberglitt, one of the lead authors. 
The study looked at 29 countries that were ranked as technologically advanced, proficient, developing or lagging.
"People in the US and Canada, Germany [representing western Europe], South Korea and Japan, Australia and Israel will benefit the most from advances in technology, and they will be able to exploit technology regardless of its sophistication," the report concludes.
As examples of potential high-tech advances, it cites growing tissue to implant and replace human body parts; creating pervasive sensor networks in public areas to conduct real-time surveillance; providing access to information any time and anywhere; and creating wearable computers. 
"China, India, Russia and others ... such as Poland [representing eastern Europe] could also make significant advances, along with simpler ones," the report says of what it describes as scientifically proficient countries.
These countries could, for example, "provide their people with drug therapies that preferentially attack specific tumors or pathogens ... [and] vastly improved medical diagnostic and surgical procedures". 
Scientifically developing countries "Mexico, Turkey, Brazil, Colombia, Indonesia, South Africa and Chile ... are poised to take advantage of modestly sophisticated technology applications including devices to constantly track the movement of everything from products to people; easy-to-use health diagnostic tests that give immediate results for a large range of infections; and environmentally friendly manufacturing methods," the study says. 
The scientifically lagging countries - Fiji, the Dominican Republic, Georgia, Nepal, Pakistan, Egypt, Iran, Jordan, Kenya, Cameroon and Chad - "are burdened by problem-plagued political systems, a lack or resources or infrastructure, and class disparities," the study says. 
"When such countries have the will to make changes ... they can improve the lives of their citizens," the study adds, citing examples such as cheap solar energy for remote or portable applications, ways to purify water that won't require major infrastructure, and rural wireless communications. 
China and India lead the group of scientifically proficient, the study adds. 
"Yet they need to continue making progress in financial institutions, legal and policy issues rural infrastructure, environmental protection, research and development investments, rural education and literacy, and governance and stability if they are to advance," it says.
