
Downloading information to your mobile phone may be a case of pointing it at a building and clicking
One day you'll be able to point your mobile phone at a train station, click and download a timetable, or point it at a museum to download a list of exhibits, researchers say.
That's the idea behind Dr Federico Casalegno's Electronic Lens or eLens project at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
You could also use the phone to contribute to conversation threads, similar to those on internet forums, about a particular business or institution.
For example, you could submit or retrieve a movie review at a movie theatre.
"It's a layer of electronic information on physical places," says Casalegno, a research scientist at MIT as well as a user-experience manager at Motorola.
The approach could change both how institutions deliver information to the public and how people interact with public and private businesses in their neighbourhood.
Casalegno's idea for the project began with the metaphor of an electronic lens that, when aimed at a building, could become a kind of viewfinder, making the institution more transparent.
The technology consists of three parts: a barcode-like tag that is placed on places of interest, software called Radioactive that is installed on the mobile phone and the social networking website Constellation.
To use the system, someone would first stick the tag on a building. 
For example, the manager of a movie theatre could stick the tag on the outside of the building, then take a picture of it with a mobile phone.
Next, the manager would launch the Radioactive program, which would ask him or her to name the tag and provide its location. The software automatically locates the tag on a map.
Then, the manager can create a message that contains text, audio, pictures or video.
There could be a tag for each movie playing in the theatre, with each tag hosting a movie trailer with show times.
Viewers with the same software on their phone can access the tag and start a conversation thread with movie reviews.
The manager can also use the Constellation social networking website to give certain groups access to the tags. Perhaps there is a promotional discount for students of a particular university.
More than movies
The technology could work for more than movies. People could place their own tags around town to open up public dialogues about parks or city schools.
They could even use the tags inside a building, such as a hospital, to provide information to select groups, such as doctors, nurses or visitors.
"It's very convincing, this idea of connecting social networks with the mobile community," says Leda Guidi, head of the citizens' communication unit for the City of Bologna, Italy, who organised the country's first free municipal internet network.
Not only does it open up more channels of communication, says Guidi, it could make commerce and government more accessible.
Casalegno has already conducted a user study of 20 people in Spain and is now working on a new version of eLens to be tested by next year with 100 participants in Boston or Chicago.
This could mean that soon, pointing and clicking will not be limited to the laptop.
