
So, tell me about yourself ...
If you go out on a first date with someone and they only tell you good things about themselves it's not because they're being dishonest. They've genuinely repressed their bad points, a memory conference has heard.
Celia Harris, an Australian PhD student at the University of New South Wales, has demonstrated that when we're courting a romantic partner we are likely to remember only the good things about ourselves while forgetting the bad.
Harris asked 86 male and female subjects to imagine they were going on a date and to list 10 positive and 10 negative things that they would recount about themselves.
"We asked them to think, you're going out with this person you've really liked for a long time, you want them to think you're funny, smart, clever, a nice person, so try and come up with things that would impress them," she says.
Positives included getting on well with their mothers, having lots of friends and helping elderly ladies carry bags.
Negatives included getting falling-down drunk, failing exams or getting into fights.
Accentuate the positive, eliminate the negative
After completing a series of tasks and undergoing a brief distraction period they were asked to recall all the negative and positive points about themselves.
While the participants remembered all the positives, they struggled to remember all the negatives.
Harris says her study demonstrates our uncanny ability to selectively forget certain things if we have a motivation, such as impressing a new love interest.
"It confirms that motivation drives what we remember and forget," she says.
"It supports the idea that there are selective phases of autobiographical memory [and]  
depending on the situation we'll facilitate certain memories for retrieval and inhibit or block the retrieval of others."
Her study is reported in a poster presentation at the 4th International Conference on Memory held in Sydney this week.
Choosing what to remember
Harris based her study on retrieval-induced forgetting, which says that repeated recall of certain items can impede our ability to remember others.
Participants were split into two groups, with one required to concentrate on five negative points in their list and the other asked to concentrate on five positive points.
While the positive group remembered all their positive memories, the negative group forgot half the negative.
This demonstrates that positive memories seem to be protected against retrieval induced forgetting, Harris says.
