
A gene type that governs brain size, which may have had a Neanderthal origin, exists in modern humans
Neanderthals may have given the modern humans who replaced them a priceless gift, a gene that helped them develop superior brains, US researchers report.
And the only way they could have provided that gift would have been by interbreeding, say the scientists. 
Their study, published online in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences this week, provides indirect evidence that modern Homo sapiens and Neanderthals interbred at some point when they lived side by side in Europe.
"Finding evidence of mixing is not all that surprising. But our study demonstrates the possibility that interbreeding contributed advantageous variants into the human gene pool that subsequently spread," says Professor Bruce Lahn, a Howard Hughes Medical Institute researcher at the University of Chicago who led the study.
Scientists have been debating whether Neanderthals, who died out about 35,000 years ago, ever bred with modern H. sapiens. Neanderthals are considered more primitive, with robust bones but a smaller intellects than modern humans.
Lahn's team found a brain gene that appears to have entered the human lineage about 1.1 million years ago.
It has a modern form, or allele, that appeared about 37,000 years ago, right before Neanderthals became extinct.
"The gene microcephalin (MCPH1) regulates brain size during development and has experienced positive selection in the lineage leading to Homo sapiens," the researchers write. 
Positive selection means the gene conferred some sort of advantage, so that people who had it were more likely to have descendants than people who did not.
A common variant
Lahn's team estimate that 70% of all living humans have this type D variant of the gene.
"By no means do these findings constitute definitive proof that a Neanderthal was the source of the original copy of the D allele. However, our evidence shows that it is one of the best candidates," Lahn says. 
The researchers reached their conclusions by doing a statistical analysis of the DNA sequence of microcephalin, which is known to play a role in regulating brain size in humans.
Mutations in the human gene cause development of a much smaller brain, a condition called microcephaly. 
By tracking smaller, more regular mutations, the researchers looked at DNA's genetic clock and dated the original genetic variant to 37,000 years ago. 
They note that this D allele is very common in Europe, where Neanderthals lived, and more rare in Africa, where they did not.
What's the advantage?
Lahn says it is not yet clear what advantage the D allele gives the human brain.
"The D alleles may not even change brain size; they may only make the brain a bit more efficient if it indeed affects brain function," he says. 
Now his team is looking for evidence of Neanderthal origin for other human genes.
