
Are we literally flushing away a potential source of extra drinking water by saying 'no' to recycled sewage?
Australians will one-day come to terms with the need to drink recycled sewage, despite the recent decision of a Queensland town to veto it, experts say.
The residents of Toowoomba voted in a weekend referendum against the plan to introduce treated sewage into the local water supply.
But advocates of recycling say rather than killing off the debate, the 'no' vote marks the opening shot in a new debate.
Professor Nick Ashbolt, head of civil and environmental engineering at the University of New South Wales (UNSW), says recycling sewage is inevitable given Australia's swelling population and looming water shortage.
"Basically it's essential," he says.
"We don't have enough water to go around. If you do the growth predictions of major cities, based on current water usage we'd be sucking our rivers dry and still not supplying enough water."
Associate Professor Greg Leslie, of the UNESCO Centre for Membrane Science and Technology at UNSW, says if Toowoomba residents had been given more information before the referendum they would have voted differently.
"What we need to do is make sure that when the next vote comes along there's a more informed debate," he says.
"The next town that makes this decision would probably do it in a more enlightened environment rather than one that was dominated by [the belief] you'll be drinking turds from your toilet."
The best drinking water in Australia
Leslie says the proposed treatment would have given Toowoomba residents the cleanest drinking water in the country.
"The water that would come out of that plant at Toowoomba, had it been built, would have been the best quality water in Australia," he says.
This is because it would have been more highly treated than normal drinking water.
Under the Toowoomba plan sewage would have passed through two membrane barriers including a 0.2 micron microfilter and a reverse osmosis membrane.
Reverse osmosis, which is also used in desalination, reduces the total organic carbon content from 8 milligrams per litre to 0.1 milligrams per litre, he says.
After passing through the filters the water would then have been treated with a combination of UV light and peroxide to "polish the water at a molecular level".
Drinking water generally only passes through a sand or carbon filter and isn't subject to reverse osmosis, he says.
While Toowoomba has been portrayed as a national landmark, Leslie says residents of one New South Wales town have been drinking treated sewage since 1985.
He says people in Richmond, west of Sydney, drink treated sewage because the effluent is released into the Hawkesbury River near the local water treatment plant, which also draws its water from the river.
"The level of treatment that [the plant] provides to the water before it puts it into the river is much less than they were proposing at Toowoomba," he says.
Ashbolt says up to 70% of the water that goes into the treatment plant is tertiary treated effluent, or effluent that been treated to the standard level to allow it to be released into the environment.
The Toowoomba plan would have involved 25% of its water coming from highly treated effluent.
"We're already doing in Sydney what they said they wouldn't do in Toowoomba," he says.
But Professor Don Bursill, retired former chief executive officer of the Cooperative Research Centre for Water Quality and Treatment, says there will always be some risks when sewage is turned into drinking water.
He says the chance of some pathogens and chemicals slipping through even the most sophisticated filtering systems can't be ruled out.
Bursill also says water workers would need to be specially trained and the regulatory system beefed up to cope with the new recycling technology.
"I'm glad the community in Toowoomba rejected it because I don't think we're ready for it," he says.
Australia also needs to concentrate on using its existing water resources more efficiently before turning to solutions like recycling, he says.
Toowoomba's vote came ahead of the pending release of draft guidelines into the use of recycled sewage being developed by the Environment Protection and Heritage Council and the National Resource Management Ministerial Councils.
The first half of the guidelines, dealing with recycled sewage for non-drinking purposes, is expected by September.
The second half, which will deal with a range of issues including recycled drinking water, is scheduled to be released for public consultation in the middle of next year.
Project Manager Ian Newbery says the documents don't recommend whether or not effluent recycling should be adopted as a source of drinking water.
But he says the issue was included in the guidelines in response to Toowoomba.
"When the guidelines were first mooted recycled drinking water wasn't actually on the priority list," he says.
"It's because of the activity in Toowoomba and other places that it's actually now inserted.
"It may be that once people get a handle on the risks involved and the treatment processes that you can go through there may be less angst about it."
