
This composite image shows a vast cloud of hot gas (red), surrounding high-energy bubbles 10,000 light years across (blue) on either side of the bright white area around the supermassive black hole
Black holes, the monstrous matter-sucking drains in space, are the most fuel-efficient engines in the universe, researchers say.
Just how efficient? If a car could use this kind of engine, it could theoretically go about 1.6 billion kilometres on 4.5 litres of petrol, says Dr Steve Allen, an assistant professor at Stanford University.
Unfortunately, no earthly car could do this, as black holes are fuelled by matter lured by the holes' vast gravity. Their pull is so strong that nothing, not even light, can escape. 
Most of the energy released by this matter as it gets close to the black hole's point of no return, or event horizon, shows up in the form of high-energy jets, which spew forth from magnetised discs of gas. 
These jets speed away from the black hole at speeds up to 95% of the speed of light, which is 300,000 kilometres per second, and create huge bubbles in the hot cosmic gas of the galaxies.
These bubbles can measure hundreds or even thousands of light-years across. A light-year is about 10 trillion kilometres, the distance light travels in a year.
To come up with their fuel-efficiency estimate, Allen and his colleagues used NASA's orbiting Chandra X-Ray Observatory to peer into the inner regions of nine giant elliptical galaxies.
This view gave the scientists an idea of how much matter, the black holes' fuel, was available. 
Other Chandra observations were used to figure out how much power would be required for the jets to produce the big bubbles.
The scientists calculated that the energy in the jets is equivalent to about trillion trillion trillion watts. 
The fuel reservoirs for these high-efficiency black hole engines are so big, the scientists say, they could keep things going for hundreds of billions of years.
This is many times the current estimated age of the universe, which is 13.7 billion years. 
How about other galaxies?
This fuel-efficient phenomenon may be common to giant galaxies like the ones the researchers observed, which are about 10 times as massive as ours. 
But they are probably not common to the Milky Way, the scientists say.
Dr Kim Weaver of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center says these supermassive black holes also appear to limit star formation and galactic sprawl.
The heat coming from the black hole jets is believed to heat up the gas around the galactic centre. Without this source of heat, the gas would cool down and form new stars, Weaver says.
"This is one way to keep the stars from forming and letting the galaxies grow bigger," she says.
