
GM cotton fights back against the Helicoverpa armigera caterpillar. But this transgenic cotton has its drawbacks, say some scientists (see Related Stories below)
Research that led to genetically modified cotton, Australia's first transgenic broadacre crop, has been awarded a prestigious award.
Three CSIRO scientists were last night presented with an ATSE Clunies Ross Award for their work on Bt cotton.
They were among researchers in the fields of environmental science, metallurgy, information technology and physics to be presented with an award, in recognition of their "outstanding achievements in the application of science and technology for the social and economic benefit of Australia".
CSIRO's plant molecular biologist Dr Danny Llewellyn, plant breeder and agronomist Dr Greg Constable and entomologist Dr Gary Fitt were awarded jointly for their work in combating the moth Helicoverpa armigera, the most destructive pest to broadacre crops.
CSIRO licensed a gene from US biotechnology company Monsanto that produced a toxin from the bacteria Bacillus thuringiensis or Bt. The researchers then introduced the gene into Australian cotton plants.
When the H. armigera caterpillar eats the transgenic cotton plant, the toxin attaches to its gut and poisons it.
This alternative approach to pest management has reduced the use of chemical pesticides by 90%, saving farmers about A$180 million a year on spraying, the researcher say.
"It used to cost A$200 million annually to spray cotton crops with pesticide to control the moth but now they only use about 10% of the insecticide they used to use," says Constable, the team leader.
"The main issue was insecticide could contaminate land, air and water so this is safer for the environment and everyone as it only kills the moth, without harming other helpful insects, creatures or humans."
Other award winners were:
* Environmental scientist Dean Cameron from Biolytix Technologies in Brisbane for developing a waste treatment system that uses worms, beetles and microscopic organisms to recycle sewage and household waste into safe irrigation water and compost.
* Professor Ron Sacks-Davis from Melbourne information technology company InQuirion, which creates information retrieval and text database management programs that searches tens of millions of pages per second. The programs have been used by US and Australian intelligence agencies for antiterrorism purposes and for drafting legislation
* Perth metallurgist Dr Gerald Roach from Alcoa World Alumna for reducing the cost of alumina production, environmental impacts and energy use and improving product quality. His research improving ore extraction efficiency has reduced bauxite waste by hundreds of thousands of tonnes annually.
* A lifetime achievement award was presented to Perth physicist Emeritus Professor Dr John de Laeter, AO, whose career began as a high school teacher. He was instrumental in developing five research centres in Western Australia, and in raising A$28 million for the scientific community and research.
Former Clunies Ross award winner, joint winner of the 2005 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Professor Barry Marshall, who discovered that the bacteria Helicobacter pylori, rather than stress, causes stomach ulcers, was guest speaker at the awards ceremony.
