
Computer-generated image of TrES-2 as seen from the night side, with its host star in the distance
Astronomers using a tiny amateur-class telescope and off-the-shelf camera lenses have found a Jupiter-sized planet orbiting a star 500 light-years from Earth.
The planet, called TrES-2, is the first to be found in this particular field of view, known as the Kepler Field.
The discovery is the second for a network called the Trans-Atlantic Exoplanet Survey, or TrES, which taps small telescopes in California, Arizona and the Canary Islands to hunt for planets outside our solar system.
The team looks for planets that pass in front of their parent stars, relative to the view from Earth.
As the planets transit, they slightly dim the total amount of visible light that radiates from the star, as seen from Earth.
By observing the star over a period of weeks or months, astronomers can detect if there are any objects that temporarily and regularly block a bit of sunlight.
"It's really difficult to make these measurements," says Francis O'Donovan, a graduate student at the California Institute of Technology and the lead author of a paper slated to appear in the Astrophysical Journal.
TrES-2 is a gas giant, similar to Jupiter but somewhat bigger and more massive.
But unlike Jupiter, TrES-2 is very close to its parent star and very hot. The planet dims its parent star's light by only 1.5% as it passes around every 2.5 days.
The astronomers also had to rule out other possible explanations for the dimming, such as a partner star gravitationally locked in orbit with the target star, called GSC 03549-02811 and located in the constellation Draco.
Finally after months of work, the observation was confirmed by a large 10 metre telescope at the Keck Observatory in Hawaii.
"All our hard work was made worthwhile when we saw the results," O'Donovan says, who hopes to parlay his discovery into a doctorate degree in astronomy.
O'Donovan's goal is to find Earth-sized planets beyond our solar system, but for that he will need much more powerful telescopes. He may return to the TrES discovery in the future.
The planet is the first found in the Kepler Field, a part of the sky that will be the sole target of a NASA telescope slated for launch in 2008.
The Kepler Space Telescope is designed to find Earth-like planets in orbits that favour the development of life.
The TrES network involves the Sleuth telescope at Caltech's Palomar Observatory in San Diego County, the Planet Search Survey Telescope at Lowell Observatory near Flagstaff, Arizona, and the Stellar Astrophysics and Research on Exoplanets (STARE) telescope in the Canary Islands.
A new larger telescope, funded by the Discovery Channel, is under development at Lowell that will also be used for hunting extrasolar planets.
