
Australia can expect a drier east and north if a crucial Pacific current continues to weaken, scientists say
The vast looping system of air currents that fuels Pacific trade winds and climate from South America to Southeast Asia may be another victim of climate change, scientists say.
This could mean more El Ni&ntilde;o-like weather patterns in the US, more rain in the western Pacific and less nourishment for marine life along the Equator and off the South American coast.
And Australia's north and east would probably be drier than normal.
Known as the Walker circulation, this system of currents functions as a huge belt stretching across the tropical Pacific, with dry air moving eastward at high altitude from Asia to South America and moist air flowing westward along the ocean's surface, pushing the prevailing trade winds. 
When the moist air gets to Asia, it triggers massive rains in Indonesia. Then it dries out, rises and starts the cycle again, heading east. 
This important system has weakened by 3.5% over the past 140 years, and the culprit is probably human-induced climate change, scientists report in today's issue of the journal Nature. 
"This is the impact of humans through burning coal, burning benzene, gasoline, everything," says author Dr Gabriel Vecchi of the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and an author of the study. 
"It's principally the greenhouse gases from fossil-fuel burning." 
The observed slowdown has been more pronounced in the past 50 years, Vecchi says, noting this fits with what theorists and computer models predict should happen as a result of human-induced global warming. 
It is not consistent with any natural fluctuation in the system, Vecchi says. 
Even this relatively small weakening in the Walker circulation means a much larger slowing of wind-forced ocean currents, the scientists say.
This could spur El Ni&ntilde;o-like effects, Vecchi says, and these in turn could have an impact as far as the US, South America and Australia. 
While these potential effects are being studied, Vecchi says it could mean more rain in the southern US, droughts elsewhere in North America, and more rain in Pacific islands like Kiribati. 
The slowdown in ocean currents is also expected to cut down on bottom-to-top ocean circulation that brings nutrients up to the surface where marine life can feed on them, the scientists say.
This could affect fishing in the equatorial Pacific. 
The weakening of the Walker circulation is projected to continue, and could weaken another 10% by 2100, the scientists report.
This could mean ocean flow could decrease by close to 20%.
According to Australia's Bureau of Meteorology, as the Walker circulation weakens, say during an El Ni&ntilde;o event, seas around Australia cool and slackened trade winds feed less moisture into the Australia-Asia region. 
This means that eastern and northern Australia will probably be drier than normal.
