
Can modern technology help solve the secrets of Egypt's ancient pyramids?
Archaeologists who measured the Egyptian pyramids at Giza more than 100 years ago were surprisingly accurate, a review of historical surveys has shown.
The paper, posted online by Australia's Queensland University of Technology, reviews the major surveying projects of the pyramids Cheops, Chephren and Mycerinus, built around 2600 BC south of what's now Cairo.
"They weren't that far out; their surveys were quite diligent and systematic and we're getting fairly good agreement using modern technology," says the paper's co-author Robert Webb, a lecturer in surveying in the school of urban development.
But Webb says laser scanning, computer modelling and other modern technology hasn't brought us any closer to answering one of the most intriguing questions about the pyramids.
This is whether their position and measurements deliberately reflect the alignment of the planets and stars.
"[Earlier surveys have found] a very close relationship to the planet alignments and what we can measure on the ground," he says.
"But it's more of a theory and some people have also found while the similarities appear on the surface to be quite close, it's just really one of those mathematical flukes."
According to the review, the two major historical surveys of the pyramids were made in 1880 and 1925 using wire, steel tape and mahogany rods.
The most recent attempts to map the pyramids have used laser scanning, GPS, satellite imaging, digital technology and computer visualisation.
Questions of alignment
The 1880-1882 survey by Sir William Flinders Petrie concluded that there was no spatial connection between the distances and directions of the pyramids and anything else.
But theories since then have suggested the spatial relationship of the pyramids reflected the alignment of Orion's Belt and the orbital path of Mercury, Mars and Venus. 
Other theories have included suggestions that the perimeter of the Great Pyramid, or Cheops, of 36,525 pyramid inches is equal to the number of days in 100 years and the number of books of ancient wisdom credited to the Egyptian god Thoth.
A pyramid inch, the basic unit used in measuring pyramids, is just a fraction over one inch.
Webb says initiatives like the University of Chicago's Giza Plateau mapping project have revealed peculiar alignments inside the pyramids that could possibly shed more light on alignment theories.
"Computer visualisation of the insides of the pyramids and their chambers has the potential to really reveal some relationships we may not know about as yet," he says.
But he says that mystery still surrounds the pyramids.
"In reality we will never know what inspired the ancient Egyptians to position the pyramids as they did," the paper concludes.
