
Researchers say their system of injecting ethanol into the engine saves petrol and costs consumers less than a hybrid car
Injecting small quantities of ethanol into car engines at moments of peak demand could improve fuel economy, US scientists say.
Researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) say a little squirt into the engine when the car is accelerating sharply or climbing a steep hill could improve fuel economy by 20-30%.
The researchers say such as system would allow carmakers to use smaller engines in their vehicles.
They say this would reduce weight and improve fuel economy at a lower cost to consumers than by adding a hybrid engine.
"To have a big impact on reducing oil consumption, one needs a low-cost way of improving efficiency, so a lot of people buy the car," says Dr Daniel Cohn, senior research scientist at MIT
He estimates that adding the ethanol injection system to a car would cost about US$1000 (A$1300) and that cars using the new system could be in mass production by 2011. 
"We view it as a very important near-term way to reduce oil consumption," Cohn says. 
The scientists say their system would only use small amounts of ethanol. And Cohn estimates the ethanol tank in cars using the technology would need to be refilled every three months or so. 
A turbocharger is added to produce more power. The ethanol injection system with the turbocharger would give a driver more power than a conventional engine of the same size, the scientists say.
How about 'knock'?
The higher pressures and temperatures of a turbocharged engine can lead to a problem known as knock, which occurs when the fuel and air in the engine explode prematurely, hurting performance and potentially damaging the engine. 
Cohn says his group's technology avoids that problem by injecting ethanol into the engine when knock is likely to occur.
The ethanol vaporises and cools the fuel-air mixture, keeping it from exploding until the engine is ready. 
"This is a very special feature of ethanol," Cohn says.
The researchers are developing and testing their system with car manufacturer Ford.
