
More than 200,000 cases of Clostridium difficile, seen here, and its cousin C. sordellii occur in the US each year, including a handful in women who have taken the RU486 abortion pill
The cause of increasing rare but deadly bacterial infections, including a handful of cases in women who have taken the controversial RU486 abortion pill, is still unclear and needs further study, US health experts say.
Two sometimes fatal bugs - Clostridium sordellii and C. difficile - are a particular worry as antibiotic resistance grows and infections occur in people usually not at risk, doctors and researchers say. 
While infections have been reported in drug users, surgical patients and accident victims, including men, cases in women who took RU486 drew the most scrutiny at the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) this week.
Officials from the CDC, Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and National Institutes of Health sought input from outside experts on what research and tracking systems are needed. 
Dr Paul Seligman, FDA associate director for safety policy, says it is not clear what is causing the spike.
"What we do know is that in this country we are seeing the simultaneous emergence of two virulent, often fatal illnesses affecting otherwise healthy people," he says. 
More difficult to treat
More than 200,000 C. difficile cases occur each year in the US, experts say. The diarrhoea-causing disease is usually manageable but has recently become more difficult to treat.
C. sordellii is far more rare and previously was not known to be toxic. "Over the past few years the picture has changed," Seligman says.
Drawing the most scrutiny are cases involving RU486, a drug that is taken with another called misoprostol early in pregnancy to trigger an abortion.
Six women who took RU486, also known as Mifeprex or mifepristone, have died since 2000. Four died from clostridium infection, one was ruled unrelated, and the other is still being investigated. Officials have not directly linked the deaths to the drug. 
The CDC says it is investigating another fatal case involving a woman who took misoprostol as part of an abortion procedure. Another fatal infection following medical abortion has yet to be confirmed. 
Ten other deadly infections have been reported in women who had given birth or who had miscarriages. 
More study needed
Several women's groups and others RU486 supporters say the infections need more study, while abortion opponents say the data shows the pill is too risky to stay on the market.
Two experts also questioned the pill. Dr James McGregor, a gynaecologist from the University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, urged officials to "reduce or eliminate" Mifeprex use. 
Overall, panelists encouraged further study, especially on women. 
"We clearly need controlled trials," says Dr Dale Gerding of Hines Veterans Affairs Hospital in Illinois.
Most also say limited government data make tracking infections tough and urge better reporting systems. 
Antiobiotics the answer?
It is not immediately clear what action the FDA might take regarding RU486 or if officials would suggest use of antibiotics to prevent infection. 
FDA's deputy director of the Office of New Drugs Sandra Kweder says the meeting shows "the picture is much more complicated" than the cases involving the abortion pill. 
"This is a far more complex medical and epidemiological situation than originally might have appeared to be the case, and we'll be trying to factor that into any actions that we take," she says.
