
The new study supports the idea that an infectious cell line is threatening to wipe out the Tasmanian devil
Dogs can 'catch' cancer by having sex with infected dogs, or perhaps by licking, biting or sniffing them, UK researchers show.
The evidence for infectious tumour cells lends weight to a new form of cancer transmission, which some researchers believe is how Tasmanian devils catch their deadly facial tumour.
Dr Claudio Murgia of University College London and colleagues report their findings in the current issue of the journal Cell.
The researchers studied unrelated dogs worldwide with the canine transmissible venereal tumour (CTVT), also known as Sticker's sarcoma.
They found that the DNA sequences isolated from tumour and blood samples were different.
"We saw the tumour cells didn't belong to the dogs," Murgia says.
Instead, the team says, the tumours from the dogs were closely related and had all come from single cancer cell that had evolved into a parasitic form.
This had been passed on from dog to dog through sexual contact and possibly through licking, biting and sniffing tumour-affected areas.
Murgia and colleagues say the cancer arose at least 200, and possibly 2500, years ago in either a wolf or a closely related ancient dog breed, making it the oldest cancer known to science.
Tasmanian devil tumour
Earlier this year Australian cytogeneticist, Anne-Maree Pearse of Tasmania's Department of Primary Industries and Water and colleagues reported preliminary evidence to support their theory that an infectious cancer cell line was responsible for the debilitating facial tumour killing endangered Tasmanian devils.
Pearse found that the chromosomes in the cancer were so complex they must have taken a long time to evolve. 
She found the same chromosome types in tumours from both males and females. And she found a devil that was born with a chromosomal abnormality did not have that abnormality in its tumour cells.
"There's no other explanation for my results," Pearse says.
"It shows absolutely that it is the cell itself that is being transmitted from animal to animal," she says. "It is the cell that's the parasite."
