
The last Neanderthals holed up in Gibraltar, a refuge on the balmy southern tip of Europe, until their lineage withered away, scientists say
Neanderthals lived in southern Europe as recently as 28,000 years ago, had a varied diet and used sophisticated tools and weapons, scientists say.
Homo neanderthalensis was thought to have survived in Europe until the arrival of modern humans about 30,000 years ago.
But new findings by Professor Clive Finlayson of the Gibraltar Museum show the two groups may have coexisted in Europe for 4000 years or longer. 
"We are showing quite clearly that they survived at the very least until 28,000 years ago and possibly as recently as 24,000 years. That is significantly later than previously thought," Finlayson says.
With Europe in the grip of an Ice Age and with their smarter cousins, Homo sapiens, spreading across the continent, the last Neanderthals holed up in a refuge on the balmy southern tip of Europe until their lineage withered away, the study says.
Neanderthals were predecessors of modern humans who inhabited Europe and parts of west and central Asia.
Despite their image as club-carrying, hairy brutes, research suggests they were expert tool makers, used animal skins to keep warm and may have cared for each other.
During a new excavation at Gorham's Cave, a rich source of prehistoric artefacts in Gibraltar, Finlayson found a campfire made by Neanderthals and remains of tools, flint weapons and animal fossils. 
Remains included those of mammals, birds and shellfish, Finlayson says.
Charcoal found at the site enabled the scientists to date it. They were also able to reconstruct the environment in which the late Neanderthals lived and found it included a variety of plants.
"It indicates to us that in spite of the glaciations further up in Europe, this was a place where the climate was still sufficiently mild for populations of Neanderthals to survive quite late," adds Finlayson, whose findings are reported online by the journal Nature.
"The last Neanderthals that occupied Gorham's Cave had access to a diverse community of plants and vertebrates on the sandy plains, open woodland and shrubland, wetlands, cliff and coastal environments surrounding the site," the study says. 
"Such ecological diversity might have facilitated their long survival." 
The scientists are excavating further in the cave where stone tools were discovered more than 50 years ago. They will also be looking for Neanderthal burial sites in the cave's deeper parts.
Co-existing with humans
How long Neanderthals and modern humans coexisted in the same geographical area is a subject of much debate, with some researchers suggesting it could have been as short as 2000 years. 
"Here we are looking at 4000 years, if not more, and that is a long time" says Finlayson.
"It sounds like very little, but if you transpose it into human generations today, 4000 years is from the time of Christ to the present and back," he adds. 
What happened to Neanderthals then?
As to the great whodunnit of palaeontology, the paper discounts the theory that these Neanderthals were annihilated by H. sapiens in the competition for food and territory.
Evidence of stone-age technology at Malaga, about 100 kilometres east of Gibraltar, shows that anatomically modern man had ventured into the neighbourhood at the time when the Neanderthals lived in Gorham Cave. 
This suggests that for several thousand years the region was a 'mosaic' of remnant Neanderthals and pioneering H. sapiens living in thinly-scattered communities.
Neanderthal DNA in modern humans?
Another theory to explain the disappearance of the Neanderthals is that they did not disappear, not genetically, at any rate. 
Under this hypothesis, Neanderthals and H. sapiens co-mingled. Far from being a dead branch of the human tree, the Neanderthals may even have bequeathed some of the traits in the H. sapiens genome that we see today.
The new paper does not address this controversial theory, but notes there is no evidence of "transitional" tools or activities at the cave. 
This adds weight to the argument that the last Neanderthals had only limited contact with H. sapiens, so interbreeding was unlikely.
The first evidence for the Neanderthals emerged in 1856, when workers at a lime quarry in the Neander Valley, western Germany, came across bones initially thought to be that of a bear.
Since then, the remains of about 400 Neanderthals have been found, at sites ranging from southern England to continental Europe and the Middle East.
