
The discovery of 11,000 year old figs shows people became farmers much earlier than we once thought
Dried-up figs found in Israel may have been the first cultivated crop more than 11,000 years ago, researchers say.
The discovery, published in the journal Science, pushes back the earliest estimates of when agriculture began by 1000 years.
And it suggests that, centuries before people figured out how to plant barley and other crops, they knew how to propagate fruit trees for sweet treats, say researchers Professor Ofer Bar-Yosef of Harvard University and Israeli co-authors.
"[Some] 11,000 years ago, there was a critical switch in the human mind, from exploiting the Earth as it is to actively changing the environment to suit our needs," says Bar-Yosef, a professor of anthropology. 
"People decided to intervene in nature and supply their own food rather than relying on what was provided by the gods. This shift to a sedentary lifestyle grounded in the growing of wild crops such as barley and wheat marked a dramatic change from 2.5 million years of human history as mobile hunter-gatherers." 
People were known to have cultivated figs for thousands of years but this finding surprised even experts. 
"It is generally accepted that the fig tree was domesticated in the Near East some 6500 years ago," says Bar-Yosef's team.
"Here we report the discovery of nine carbonised fig fruits ... stored in Gilgal I, an early Neolithic village, located in the Lower Jordan Valley, which dates to 11,400 to 11,200 years ago." 
A special type of fig
The figs are a variety that produces a large, sweet fruit, as opposed to the wild type, the researchers say. 
In this variety, known as parthenocarpic figs, the fruit develops without insect pollination and is prevented from falling off the tree, which allows it to become soft, sweet and edible. 
But because such figs do not produce seeds, they cannot reproduce unless people propagate them, perhaps by planting shoots or branches.
"Dried figs similar in size and structure imported from Iran are found today in the markets of London," the scientists say. 
Dried figs
The carbonised figs were not distorted, which, the researchers say, suggests they may have been dried for human consumption.
"Once the parthenocarpic mutation occurred, humans must have recognised that the resulting fruits do not produce new trees, and fig tree cultivation became a common practice," Bar-Yosef says. 
"In this intentional act of planting a specific variant of fig tree, we can see the beginnings of agriculture. This edible fig would not have survived if not for human intervention." 
At the same site researchers found foods that must have been gathered, such as acorns and wild oats.
