
Artist's impression of the core of the telescope
Australia and Southern Africa have been shortlisted to host a new radio telescope that is 50 times more powerful than any that exist today.
The shortlist for the international Square Kilometre Array (SKA) telescope was announced in The Netherlands this week.
The telescope will use low-frequency radio waves to probe deep into the cosmos and aid the study of pulsars, colliding black holes, dark energy and the influence of magnetic fields on the development of stars and galaxies.
And it will allow detection of any radar signals from extra-terrestrial intelligence that might be lurking in our galaxy.
"It is going to provide us with a whole new window on the universe," says SKA steering committee member Professor Brian Boyle from CSIRO.
The SKA telescope is not a single giant instrument but a set of thousands of antennas spread out in a spiral over 3000 kilometres with antennas at the centre closest together.
In Australia the proposed site for the core of the telescope is at Mileura station, 800 kilometres northeast of Perth in Western Australia. 
Antennas will be distributed across the continent, possibly extending to New Zealand.
In Southern Africa, the core of the telescope would be sited in the Northern Cape region of South Africa with dishes extending to Botswana, Namibia, Mozambique, Madagascar, Mauritius, Kenya and Ghana.
A bid from China was rejected because the proposed site for the core was not flat enough, says Boyle.
And a joint bid from Argentina and Brazil was eliminated because of turbulent ionospheric conditions above South America that would interfere with the low-frequency radio waves used by the SKA.
International committee
Boyle says the shortlist decision was made by the SKA steering committee which has 21 members, including two Australians, one South African and one Chinese member.
The committee oversees and co-ordinates research and will eventually pull together a single design for the telescope.
Although some countries have more members on the committee than others, Boyle says the decision was made on a purely scientific and technical basis.
He also says Australia should be selected as the final site.
"I passionately believe that Australia is the best site for the SKA from a scientific basis," he says.
So far Australia has built a small prototype telescope at the core site, called the Mileura Wide-Field Array, supported by US investment.
The final decision is expected towards the end of the decade and the telescope is expected to cost 1 billion euros (A$1.7 billion) in total.
Despite the tens of millions already spent on developing SKA technology and telescope design in Australia, and even if it isn't the final location, Australia astronomers will still be ahead, Boyle says.
He says the money spent has already improved Australia's radio astronomy capability and the effort has developed Australian expertise in radio telescope design and radio astronomy itself.
And wherever the telescope is built, Boyle says astronomers will be able to access it remotely from their desktop via broadband networks from wherever they are in the world.
