
Relationships, family and social standing are all sources of stress for female baboons - sound familiar?
Female baboons get stressed about males and even suffer from premenstrual tension, a new study shows.
According to the research, the number one cause of stress for female chacma baboons (Papio hamadryas ursinus) is when a new male enters a group and may threaten to bully and kill other baboons, especially infants.
"That suggests to me that females are highly aware of the risks presented by violent young males entering the troop," says Dr Anne Engh, lead author of the study, which was published recently in the journal Animal Behavior.
Engh, a researcher in the Department of Biology at the University of Pennsylvania, and her team studied approximately 70 male and female baboons over a 16-month period in Botswana's Moremi Game Reserve.
They collected faecal samples from females for stress hormone analysis.
Prior research has found that glucocorticoids, a class of steroid hormones, rise when apes, humans and other animals feel stress.
Baboons get PMT too
Besides male immigration, reproductive state, predation, rank instability and infanticide also triggered female stress.
The stress hormone rise during reproductive stages is normal, and indicates that female apes, like women, could experience a potentially cranky PMT phase.
Female baboons usually exist in stable, hierarchical groups, but the researchers observed two instances where low status females tried to pull rank and stress levels rose.
In one case, an adult female, her adult daughter and a sister all attempted to usurp the power of another unit. After a week of fighting and high stress, the lower-ranked group gave up.
In the second period of observed instability, an adult female named Cat ran off with a high-ranked male for several days.
When she returned, a "Cat-fight" ensued with the other females. The fights not only lowered the status of Cat, but also placed the unfortunate baboon's daughter, sisters, aunt and their children to the bottom of the hierarchy.
"Our best guess is that poor Cat just had very bad timing," Engh says.
"When she left the troop with the alpha male, more than half of the troop's females were cycling, so there was probably quite a bit of competition between the females to catch the alpha's eye."
Anxiety levels also rose when males, attempting to assert their power, killed infants. For several days after an infant's murder, its mother would scream and flee whenever the killing male approached.
What can baboons teach us about stress?
Engh says friendships with less aggressive males and grooming with females seems to reduce the females' fear and stress.
Professor Joan Silk, a University of California at Los Angeles anthropologist noted for her work on the evolution of social behaviour in primates, says she has worked at the same reserve where the new study took place, and that this "account seems consistent with what I know of the females there."
She says, "The results provide independent confirmation of the supposition that sociality has important consequences for females."
Baboons in their natural habitat appear to cope with stress better than humans do, Engh says.
"Humans, in contrast, get stressed out about many things, often things that are of little significance in our lives or are completely abstract threats," she says.
"We would probably be better off aping baboons and worrying only about the important things in our lives."
