
Implanting false memories can have health benefits like preventing alcohol abuse. But is it ethical to brainwash people?
Implanting false memories of a bad experience with alcohol could prevent people abusing alcohol in later life, a Canadian researcher says.
Dr Dan Bernstein from Kwantlen University College, shows that if people are led to believe they once drank themselves sick it can affect their taste for a particular drink.
He presented the unpublished research, conducted over the past year, at the 4th International Conference on Memory in Sydney today.
In the study 142 people aged 18-20 were told they had had a bad past experience with alcoholic drinks including rum.
"We wanted to know whether there were consequences to false memory and we looked at whether we could increase people's confidence that they got sick drinking rum some time in their past," Bernstein says.
"What we find is that if you've increased your confidence that you've got sick drinking rum, you now give rum less preference."
Rewriting the past
Participants' memories were manipulated by telling them that a computer had generated a personal profile based on a questionnaire about past eating and drinking habits.
They were told they had become sick on rum in the past and they were asked to elaborate on that experience.
About a quarter of the participants became more confident that they had actually been sick on rum.
"We find that between 30 and 40% increased their confidence for the critical item in comparison to a control group," he says.
When they were asked to rate how much they liked rum they rated it less highly than before their memories were manipulated.
Ethical issues
Bernstein says if it can be shown that implanting false memories can have a long-term effect on putting people off certain alcoholic drinks it could be a useful deterrent to alcohol abuse.
"If we showed that it had a lasting behavioural effect then it could possibly have some preventative utility, but that's a long way off," he says.
Professor Mike Toglia, a US expert in false memories from the State University of New York, who wasn't involved in the research, says Bernstein's work offers a new application for this field of memory research.
He acknowledges there are ethical issues about brainwashing.
"There's always been the concern that implanting false memories is a form of brainwashing and some people believe that maybe this kind or research should be stopped for that reason," he says.
"But I think the good that can be done can outweigh the risks."
Beating obesity
Manipulating memory could also be used to prevent overeating, Bernstein says.
But prior bad experiences don't create an aversion to all foods and drinks, Bernstein says, only those with a distinct or unusual flavour.
"With some drinks and some food you may have got sick but it doesn't seem to have this imprint, this lasting effect," he says.
He says his previous research managed to induce an aversion to strawberry ice cream, but didn't work so well when it came to chips. 
"We couldn't turn them off potato chips," he says.
"In fact we got a little rebound and they thought 'give me more!'"
