
These magnetic patches cause variations in the Sun's brightness. But research released today says these variations are not enough to cause climate change
The Sun's energy output has barely varied over the past 1000 years, according to a study that weakens claims that climate change is due to natural sunspot cycles.
An international team of researchers found that the Sun's brightness varies by only 0.07% over 11-year sunspot cycles, far too little to account for the rise in temperatures since the Industrial Revolution. 
"Our results imply that over the past century climate change due to human influences must far outweigh the effects of changes in the Sun's brightness," says Australian born Dr Tom Wigley of the US National Center for Atmospheric Research. 
Many scientists say that emissions of greenhouse gases, mainly from burning fossil fuels in power plants, factories and cars, are the main cause of a 0.6&deg;C rise in temperatures over the past century. 
A smaller group of scientists says that the dominant cause of warming is a natural variation in the climate system, or a gradual rise in the Sun's energy output.
"The solar contribution to warming over the past 30 years is negligible," the researchers write in the journal Nature, based on evidence from satellite observations since 1978.
They also found little sign of solar warming or cooling when they checked telescope observations of sunspots against temperature records going back to the 17th century. 
They then checked more ancient evidence of rare isotopes and temperatures trapped in sea sediments and Greenland and Antarctic ice and also found no dramatic shifts in solar energy output for at least the past millennium.  
Sun not guilty, says study
"This basically rules out the Sun as the cause of global warming," says Dr Henk Spruit, a co-author of the report from the Max Planck Institute for Astrophysics in Germany. 
Spruit says a Little Ice Age around the 17th century, when London's Thames River froze, seemed limited mainly to western Europe and so was not a planet-wide cooling that might have implied a dimmer Sun. 
And global Ice Ages, like the last one that ended about 10,000 years ago, seem linked to cyclical shifts in the Earth's orbit around the Sun rather than to changes in solar output.
"Overall, we can find no evidence for solar luminosity variations of sufficient amplitude to drive significant climate variations on centennial, millennial or even million-year time scales," the report says. 
Solar activity is now around a low on the 11-year cycle after a 2000 peak, when bright spots called faculae emit more heat and outweigh the heat-plugging effect of dark sunspots.
Both faculae and dark sunspots are most common at the peaks. 
Still, the report also says there could be other, more subtle solar effects on the climate, such as from cosmic rays or ultraviolet radiation. It says they would be hard to detect.
