
Male chimps fight over older females, who are seen as a prize catch
Chimpanzee males prefer to have sex with older females, according to US researchers, showing one of the biggest behavioural differences between humans and our closest biological relatives.
Male chimps will chase down and fight over the oldest females.
Meanwhile, the youngest female chimps are forced to beg for masculine attention, say anthropologist Assistant Professor Martin Muller and colleagues at Boston University. 
"It's really dramatic because it's not just that the old chimps are avoiding the youngest adult females. They actually have a strong preference for the older mothers," Muller says. 
Writing in the journal Current Biology, Muller and colleagues say they studied chimpanzees living in the Kanyawara community of Kibale National Park in Uganda. 
It is easy to observe their mating behaviour. 
"Chimpanzee copulations are frequently preceded by a series of male courtship signals (eg, glancing with erect penis and branch shaking), after which either the male or the female approaches the other to mate," the researchers write. 
They also collected the chimps' urine to test for various hormones that demonstrate fertility. 
The researchers were checking to see if chimpanzees behave like humans, their closest living relatives, who form long-term mating bonds and who value younger females. 
This is most definitely not the case with chimps. The very oldest adult females were the most sought after. 
"The males fight over them more," Muller says. 
"They don't have to do anything to get the males interested. The males find them. They follow them around. If you look at the very youngest females, the males will mate with them but it does take more work on the female's part." 
Showing off
Also unlike humans, female chimpanzees actively advertise when they are fertile, with bright red swellings around the genital area.
And unlike human females, chimpanzees apparently remain fertile their entire lives, although these wild Ugandan chimpanzees rarely lived beyond the age of 40.
Muller says that older female chimpanzees are more dominant socially and have access to better food. 
"The females that have access to the most food are the most fecund, the most likely to conceive in any cycle," he says. And males may know that.
Older females may also be better mothers, the researchers guess. 
"The males do end up mating with all the females for the most part," Muller notes. But he says the study challenges common conceptions. 
"Normally, I think peoples' default assumption is, 'Well other animals, they must also find young females attractive'," Muller says. "And people assume that young females are more fertile than older females." 
But female chimpanzees do not experience the rapid decline in fertility that is seen in human females after their 20s.
