
The ability to download music has made it possible for athletes to better exploit the power of music while training and competing
Technology like the mp3 player is revolutionising sports psychology, according to an expert who says these devices are allowing athletes to harness the psychological benefits of music as never before.
Professor Peter Terry of the University of Southern Queensland says technology like running shoes that increase the beat of music in time with a runner's pace and even implantable micro-mp3 players may one day give athletes the winning edge.
"It's certainly going to add a new level to [athletic] potential," says Terry, who has been to seven Olympic Games as a sports psychologist and published widely on the power of music in enhancing athletic performance.
But he says the technology could create a whole new conundrum for sports authorities by making them redefine whether the use of performance enhancing music is cheating.
Terry will talk about the latest research into the psychological effects of music in sport at a joint conference of the Australian Psychological Society and the New Zealand Psychological Society in Auckland next week.
Terry says the benefits of music on exercise have been known since the days that galley slaves were forced to row to the rhythm of drum beats.
But it's only in the past decade that this has been scientifically demonstrated.
Music boosts performance in a number of ways, he says.
"If you synchronise whatever activity you're engaging in to the tempo of music there's a very clearly energic effect," he says.
"In other words, if you play music with a fast tempo, people work harder."
Music also acts as a mood enhancer, which can put athletes in a "winning" mood, he says.
Music like Eye of the Tiger and the theme from Rocky are classics.
Whitney Houston's One Moment in Time was a particular favourite with certain members of the Australian team during the Sydney Olympics who saw it as reflecting their personal goal to 'seize their moment'.
"It's a bit cheesy but a number of people really bought into it and the lyrics supported what they were about," he says.
But music choices can sometimes be counterintuitive, he says, citing a super heavyweight boxer who liked to listen to classical Japanese music before getting into the ring.
Terry says a computer company has already entered a deal with a sportswear manufacturer to produce an armband you can slip your mp3 player into.
Also in the pipeline are shoes with sensors that pick up how fast you're going and coordinate the beat of the music to ensure you maintain the pace.
He also says being able to download music has made it easier for athletes to come up with music that's highly personalised to their individual training and competing program.
In 1998 Haile Gebreselasie set an indoor world record for the 2000 metres by synchronising his stride rate to the song Scatman.
"At the moment the attitude towards that is that it's almost cheating, and that's because that synchronous effect is so well understood" Terry says. 
The question of cheating may become even more fraught with the prospect of tiny mp3 players that can be worn under the skin.
"People are already having implants for contraception, why not for performance?" Terry says.
"I think there's a whole new world possible as microtechnology develops."
