
Patients who take an active role in managing their own health may still need help in the decision-making process, researchers say
When faced with a tough medical decision, imagine that you're making it for a friend rather than for yourself, a new study suggests. 
That may make such choices easier, report scientists in the June issue of the Journal of General Internal Medicine.
"We think that it's understandably easy to get caught up in the difficulty of the moment - a patient has just been diagnosed with a problem, they're facing a complex treatment decision; it's hard to see the big picture," says Dr Brian Zikmund-Fisher of the University of Michigan.
"It's actually relatively easy for people to gain a different type of perspective by thinking about what they would do if they were recommending for someone else." 
Zikmund-Fisher and his team looked at a phenomenon known as omission bias.
This is when a person faced with a medical decision may choose passive nonintervention rather than an active approach due to fear of causing harm to themselves. 
The researchers asked 2399 people to imagine themselves as a patient, a doctor treating a patient, a medical director creating patient guidelines, or a parent making a decision for a child. 
The people in the study were then asked to make medical choices in two different scenarios. 
In one, there is a deadly flu circulating that will kill 10% of people who aren't vaccinated, although the vaccine itself carries a 5% risk of causing death.
In the second, participants were asked to decide on whether or not to treat a slow-growing cancer with chemotherapy. 
Changing hats
Study participants were more likely to choose the active approach when making a decision as a professional, rather than for themselves.
Some 73% of those imagining themselves as doctors would opt for the vaccine, compared to 63% of those posing as medical directors and 48% making the decision for themselves.
A total of 68% of those taking the physician or medical director role opted for chemotherapy, compared to 60% of those in the patient role. 
Thinking as parents, 57% of study participants would choose the vaccine for their child, and 72% would opt for chemotherapy. 
This suggests, Zikmund-Fisher says, that if a child is already sick a parent may feel more comfortable choosing active treatment than when making the decision to choose preventive but potentially risky treatment for a healthy child. 
Advice from doctors?
Doctors are increasingly allowing patients to be a part of the decision-making process, Zikmund-Fisher notes. But the findings suggest they shouldn't opt out of advising patients entirely.
"The physician might be able to act as a coach to help guide the decision making process," he says.
Doctors could propose that patients try to think of themselves as making the decision for a friend, he explains. 
"Helping the patient to take a step back might make for a better decision-making process all around."
