
Australian soccer fans might not be disappointed, according to statistical analysis of the Socceroos' chances in the World Cup
Australia has roughly the same chance of winning the World Cup as you have tossing three sixes with three dice, says a sports statistician.
Professor Stephen Clarke, a researcher at Swinburne University says Australia has a 180 to one, or 0.6%, chance of winning the final.
"This is not bad and nowhere near as small as the chance of being killed in a terrorist attack or winning [the lottery]," he says.
"It's slightly more than flipping eight heads in a row (1 in 256) or tossing three sixes with three dice (1 in 216)."
While Australia goes into the World Cup as an underdog, Clarke says, statistically speaking, the nature of soccer gives the weaker side a chance.
He says, if one team is expected to kick two goals in a match and another is expected  to only kick one, the stronger side still only has a 61% chance of winning, with a 21% chance of a draw. The weaker team has an 18% chance of winning.
Function of rare events
"Soccer is very variable," he says.
"In Australian Rules football, suppose one team kicks on average a goal every 10 minutes and the other team kicks on average a goal every five minutes. The chances the weaker team will kick more goals than the other team is quite small.
"But in soccer it doesn't work that way because goals are much rarer, it's a function of rare events," he says.
Australia has a 32% chance of making it through to the second round.
Predictions on various teams' chances at making various stages of the World Cup are posted on the Swinburne sports statistics website.
They were formulated by Andrew Patterson, a former honours student turned professional punter and consultant number cruncher.
At the latest analysis the figures showed perennial favourite Brazil has a 29% chance of winning, followed by England with a 10% chance.
According to Patterson's analysis, Australia the same chance of winning as the Ivory Coast, and Serbia and Montenegro.
Trinidad and Tobago is ranked at the bottom of the ladder with a demoralising 0% chance of winning the World Cup.
Factoring in public opinion
Patterson worked out the statistics using odds from an international online betting exchange and ran them through a computer model taking into account the structural peculiarities of the World Cup competition and other factors.
"I've taken a combination of the public's opinion as well as past data and my own statistical expertise to come up with a statistical model that predicts a team's chances," he says.
His model will update predicted outcomes as the tournament progresses.
Patterson says his analysis also puts Australia as favourite to win its opener against Japan on 12 June.
"I put the two sides into the computer and based on how they currently stand ... There's a 55% chance Australia will win and a 45% chance that Japan will win," he says.
"When we factor a draw in we come up with 38%  Australia, 31% Japan, 31% the draw. It's pretty much a hedged result."
The World Cup kicks off on 9 June.
