
Industrial aerosols don't just affect air quality but also the temperature of our oceans
A projected drop in air pollution will affect global ocean currents and could cause a marked rise in water temperature in the southern hemisphere, the author of a new study says.
Dr Wenju Cai and colleagues from CSIRO Marine and Atmospheric Research are the first to model the impact of changing levels of particulate air pollution, or aerosols, on ocean currents.
They publish their findings in the journal Geophysical Research Letters.
Cai says air pollution like sulfate, organic particles and black carbon produced from fossil fuel burning, transport emissions and power plants, has increased rapidly over the past 50 years.
But tighter regulation and a worldwide move towards cleaner fuels means some projections have aerosols dropping to pre-1960 levels by around 2050, Cai says.
This, however, has a downside. Less air pollution means sunlight can more easily reach Earth, which many researchers say could mean higher temperatures.
Cai says rises in surface and water temperature could also cause a slowdown in the so-called worldwide conveyor belt, an ocean circulation system that transports heat from southern hemisphere oceans to those in the north.
So cleaner air will result in colder northern hemisphere temperatures and warmer waters in the south, Cai says.
"That will have a big impact in Europe and the northern hemisphere because the conveyor belt is sending heat to that part of the globe," he says.
"In the southern hemisphere ... we will get warmer faster and the rise in sea levels will accelerate."
Cai says warming will be most rapid in the Tasman Sea, which could heat up by 4&#176;C by 2100, with major implications for marine life and ecosystems.
How do aerosols influence ocean currents?
Aerosols keep the Earth cool by reflecting away solar radiation, says Cai's co-author and CSIRO colleague Dr John Church. So, they are thought to mask some of the effects of global warming.
But because industrial development has produced a higher concentration of aerosols in the northern hemisphere than the south, in the past the cooling effect has been more marked in the north.
Cooler northern hemisphere temperatures should mean cooler northern oceans, and cooler waters should equate with lower sea levels.
This wasn't the case, says Church. Instead, the study found evidence that the cooling waters had intensified movement of the conveyer belt, speeding up delivery of heat from south to north.
Reversal
The situation may reverse once aerosol levels fall, Cai says, effectively causing a slow-down in the transport of heat from the southern hemisphere to the north.
Cai says an exaggerated version of this scenario was the basis for the Hollywood movie The Day After Tomorrow, in which a change in ocean currents produces a new ice age.
Church says it's unclear exactly how dropping aerosol levels will affect global temperatures when combined with rising temperatures associated with the greenhouse effect.
"We don't understand the aerosol forcing as well as greenhouse, so there's a question of how much of the global warming is compensated by aerosols," he says.
"If it's a small amount, as we reduce the aerosols in the atmosphere there won't be a rapid acceleration of climate change, but if they're actually masking a very large amount then as we reduce the aerosols that has big implications."
