
Artificial sweeteners accelerate the emptying of the stomach and increase the rate at which alcohol is absorbed
Alcoholic drinks made with artificial sweeteners lead to a high rate of alcohol absorption, resulting in a greater blood alcohol concentration than from drinks made with sugar-based mixers, a new study has found.
The reason, according to an Australian team' led by Dr Chris Rayner of the Royal Adelaide Hospital, is the accelerated emptying of the stomach caused by artificial sweetening agents.
Rayner presented his team's research at this week's Digestive Disease Week meeting in Los Angeles.
"Today, more and more people are shifting personal preferences by choosing 'diet' drinks as a healthier alternative," says Rayner. 
"What people do not understand is the potential side effects that diet mixed alcoholic drinks may have on their body's response to alcohol."
Rayner and team studied eight healthy male volunteers. 
On one day, the subjects consumed an orange-flavoured vodka drink made from alcohol and a mixer sweetened with sugar containing 478 calories.
On the second day, the men drank the same amount of alcohol with a diet mixer containing 225 calories. 
The researchers measured the rate of stomach emptying using ultrasound technology and took blood samples at 30-minute intervals for three hours.
The time to empty half of the diet drink from the stomach was 21 minutes, compared to regular drinks which took 36 minutes for the same degree of emptying. 
Peak blood alcohol concentrations were substantially greater with diet drinks at an average of 0.05%, while regular drinks measured at 0.03% blood alcohol concentration.
"It was surprising how much of a difference the artificial sweetener made," Rayner says. 
Rayner says these drinks also tend to be consumed at times other than meal times, when food would slow gastric emptying.
He recommends that product labelling include information on the intoxicating qualities of artificially sweetened alcoholic drinks. 
There could be legal implications for those driving home, as well, he notes.
