
This contour map, which illustrates the shape of the poplar panel on which the Mona Lisa was painted, shows there is most warping near the left shoulder
Leonardo da Vinci's Mona Lisa originally wore a delicate maternity garment and her hair was gathered up in a bun, 3D imaging shows.
These details, which had disappeared under varnish, have now been revealed using a colour laser scanner that imaged the painting to a resolution finer than the width of a human hair.
Researchers of the National Research Council Canada (NRC) announced their findings this week.
"This is the Mona Lisa as we have never seen her before," says NRC president Dr Pierre Coulombe.
NRC researchers travelled to Paris to conduct the research on probably the Louvre Museum's most viewed painting.
They did this at the request of the French state museum agency's Centre for Research and Restoration.
The 3D scans reveal that the woman with the enigmatic smile was originally painted with her hair tied back in a bun, even though today it appears loose on her shoulders.
The revelation settles an old controversy because only girls or women of bad virtue wore their hair loose in 16th century Italy, says project leader Bruno Mottin from the state museum agency. The real Mona Lisa was a woman of social stature.
One of her garments, similar to fashions that pregnant or nursing women wore in this period, was also lost under yellow varnish and no longer visible to the naked eye, the infrared scans show. 
"This is something that had never been seen until now," Mottin says. 
The real Mona Lisa had three children. Da Vinci was commissioned by wealthy Florentine businessman Francesco del Giocondo to paint his wife between 1503 and 1506 after the birth of their second child.
But da Vinci kept the painting and worked on it until his death, probably changing her hair and other features.
In the original Mona Lisa, the subject gripped her chair more tightly, and she is not resting against the back of her chair, as some believed, but sitting upright, the scans show. 
Researchers also gleaned insights about the da Vinci's painting technique, including his sfumato or smoke technique of soft, heavily shaded modelling, says Mottin. 
"There is no special mystery in the painting like in [Dan Brown's book] The Da Vinci Code," he says.
"But in that painting Leonardo tried to capture the essence of life ... It embodies all his skills ... That is the true mystery we've uncovered." 
Researchers identified a lack of brushstrokes, suggesting that da Vinci may have used his fingers to paint, except there are no fingerprints on the artwork. 
Scans of the Mona Lisa reveal that darker areas, such as the eyes and corners of her smile, are thicker and "composed of a succession of thinly applied glaze layers", says NRC scientist Fran&ccedil;ois Blais. 
But how da Vinci actually applied his layers of pigment and oil medium remains a mystery, he says.
"It's extremely thinly painted and extremely flat, and yet the details of the curls of hair, for example, are extremely distinct. So, the technique is unlike anything we've ever seen before," says John Taylor of the NRC. 
Split in the painting
A 12 centimetre split at the top of the painting, which worried curators, appears to be stable, NRC scientists say.
It was probably caused by the removal of the original frame and repaired between the middle of the 18th and beginning of the 19th century, they say. 
Also, the poplar wood panel on which da Vinci painted his masterwork has a convex warp on the middle right side that is 12 millimetres higher  than its surroundings, researchers say. 
But it does not threaten the Mona Lisa smile.
The 3D scans were done over two nights in October 2004 before the painting was placed in a new glass display case at the Louvre. 
The scanner recorded the 3D shape and colour of the painting at a resolution of 60 micrometres and a depth of 10 micrometres.
Mottin says although the Mona Lisa is seen by seven million visitors to the museum a year, scientists have had few opportunities to study her in a laboratory.
They studied her once in the 1930s, in 1952 and now.
"She suffers from her celebrity," he says.
The new images will allow curators to continue their research without touching the canvas, as well as try new restoration techniques on the 3D model before applying them to the actual portrait, says Taylor. 
The Canadian camera technology has been used to scan Michelangelo's statue David and paintings by artists like Renoir and Corot. 
It was also used to create animation for Hollywood movies such as Peter Jackson's Lord of the Rings trilogy and on board the NASA space shuttle Atlantis to examine the changing state of the shuttle's heat tiles during a mission.
