
Wild emmer wheat, shown here, is more nutritious than some types of domestic wheat. So scientists have crossbred new and old strains to improve levels of protein, zinc and iron
Scientists have found a way to boost wheat's nutrient content by reintroducing a gene that was 'lost' over the years as the wild plant was domesticated.
Writing in the journal Science, the researchers say they used conventional breeding methods to bring the gene into cultivated wheat varieties, enhancing their protein, zinc and iron value.
The gene, which Professor Jorge Dubcovsky from the University of California, Davis and colleagues have identified, has became nonfunctional for unknown reasons over the years.
This occurred as humans cultivated the wild wheat, known as wild emmer wheat (Triticum turgidum ssp dicoccoides).
Wheat represents one of the major crops feeding people worldwide, providing about 20% of all calories consumed.
The World Health Organization says that upward of 2 billion people get too little zinc and iron in their diet, and more than 160 million children under the age of 5 lack adequate protein. 
"We really can produce wheat with more protein and more zinc and iron," Dubcovsky says.
"So if that is grown in a developing country or is used as food aid, it will really provide more of those needed things in places where it's necessary." 
Same taste
In making the wheat more nutritious, the researchers did not change how it tastes, Dubcovsky says.
"We're not changing the composition or anything very dramatic in the grain," he says. 
"I don't think a simple step like this will solve hunger in the world. I'm not that naive. But I think it's heading in the right direction," Dubcovsky says. 
The gene made the grain mature more quickly while also boosting its protein and micronutrient content by 10-15% in the pasta and bread wheat varieties with which the researchers worked.
"What this gene does is it uses better what is in the plant already, so rather than leave the protein and the zinc and iron in the straw, we've moved a little bit more into the grain," Dubcovsky says. 
The wheat varieties bred by the scientists are not genetically modified, which could help them become accepted commercially, they say. 
"We didn't do it by genetic modification. The normal wheat crosses perfectly well with the wild wheat. So we just crossed it after normal breeding," Dubcovsky says.
The research team includes scientists from the US Department of Agriculture and the University of Haifa in Israel. 
Dubcovsky heads a consortium of 20 public wheat-breeding programs called the Wheat Coordinated Agricultural Project.
Annual wheat production is estimated at 620 million tonnes of grain worldwide.
