
Canada geese fall sick when they eat designer grass laced with fungus
Designer strains of grass could one day be used to keep birds away from golf courses and airports, New Zealand scientists say.
Research into these smart grasses is discussed this week at the Agricultural Biotechnology Industry Conference in Melbourne.
Chris Pennell and his colleagues at Ag Research New Zealand have been working on particular types of fungi that co-exist with grass.
These fungi, called endophytes, live in the spaces between plant cells.
By choosing the right combination of endophyte and grass, the researchers hope to produce turf with unique properties.
Some endophytes repel insects and others are toxic to livestock that graze on them, Pennell says.
Over the past two decades, he and his colleagues have been working to find the right combinations of grass and fungus to offer the benefits without the toxic side-effects.
"We've been looking for the friendly endophytes," Pennell says of the research, which has mostly been for the livestock industry.
More recently, the researchers have also begun designing grass and fungus combinations to keep birds away.
Insects can't eat these grasses, which deprives some birds of their food source. 
They can also give grass-eating birds such as Canada geese an illness the researchers call "post-ingestion malaise". 
"When herbivorous birds eat this grass they get sick and then they don't come back again," says Richard Curtis, business development manager at Ag Research New Zealand.
The idea is that for airports, planting grass that keeps insects and birds away could help reduce dangerous birdstrikes where our feathered friends collide with aircraft.
In the past few months, the team has planted test plots of the grasses at Christchurch International Airport. The early results are promising, Curtis says of the research, which the airport helped to fund. 
"It won't solve all the problems with birds around airports, but it'll be a part of the overall bird management armoury," he says. "There is a lot of interest from airport companies around the world." 
Meanwhile, the scientists are also applying the technology to golf courses, where fouling from birds like Canada geese can spoil a day on the greens.
Early trials on New Zealand golf courses shows that planting a 10 metre strip of the smart grass around waterways keeps geese and other birds away, Curtis says.
"They just packed up and went to other parts of the golf course."
