
Putting babies to sleep on their backs allows them to respond to their arousal reflexes
An abnormality in part of the brain that controls breathing, arousal and other reflexes may be what causes sudden infant death syndrome, a finding that could lead to a preventive treatment, a study says.
The discovery could explain why babies lying face down are more likely to die of SIDS.
In that position an infant's reflexes, including head turning and arousal, are harder to trigger when breathing is challenged, says the report from Children's Hospital Boston and Harvard Medical School.
The study, published in this week's Journal of the American Medical Association,  was based on autopsy data from 31 infants who had died from SIDS and 10 who had died from other causes between 1997 and 2005 in California.
In the SIDS infants, a look at the lowest part of the brainstem, the medulla oblongata, found abnormalities in nerve cells that make and use serotonin, one of the chemicals in the brain that transmit messages between nerve cells. 
Serotonin and how it is processed in the brainstem may help coordinate breathing, blood pressure, sensitivity to carbon dioxide and temperature, the report says.
When babies sleep face down or have their faces covered by bedding, they are thought to breathe exhaled carbon dioxide back in, depriving them of oxygen.
When that happens the carbon dioxide increase would normally trigger nerve cells in the brainstem, which in turn stimulate respiratory and arousal centres in the brain. 
"A normal baby will wake up, turn over, and start breathing faster when carbon dioxide levels rise," says Dr Hannah Kinney of the Boston hospital, an author of the paper. 
But babies with the defect die because the reflexes are impaired, she says. 
Public health campaigns aimed at reducing the risk of SIDS have advised parents to put infants to sleep on their back, and to avoid soft bedding, sharing a bed with an infant, smoking during pregnancy and smoking around a baby after birth.
Among the SIDS infants in the new study, 65% were sleeping prone or on their side at the time of death, indicating a need for continued public information on the problem, the study says. 
The findings may spur development of a diagnostic test to identify infants at risk, or perhaps some day a drug or other type of treatment to protect infants with abnormal brainstem serotonin systems, the authors say. 
"This finding lends credence to the view that SIDS risk may greatly increase when an underlying predisposition combines with an environmental risk, such as sleeping face down, at a developmentally sensitive time in early life," says Dr Duane Alexander, director of the US National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, which helped to pay for the study.
