
This gully deposit, which scientists say is evidence of water on Mars, formed sometime between August 1999 and February 2004. So does this mean that water is still flowing today?
Photographs of Mars show features that most likely were made by water flowing on the planet today, says the US space agency.
"No one expected what we found today," says Dr Kenneth Edgett, a scientist with Malin Space Science Systems in San Diego. "We are talking about liquid water that is present on Mars right now."
The images were taken by NASA's Mars Global Surveyor, which had been studying the Red Planet for a decade before an apparent mission-ending failure last month.
The discovery raises the prospect that life could exist on Mars today, says Dr Michael Meyer, lead scientist for NASA's Mars Exploration Program.
The agency has mounted a series of increasingly sophisticated missions to look for signs of past water on Mars in hopes of identifying areas that could have been suitable for life to form.
"Maybe we no longer have to think about following the water, but watching the water," Edgett says.
The conclusion that water flows on Mars today is based on photographs the Global Surveyor took of gullies etched in the Martian soil.
Two sites in particular caught researchers' eyes because there were noticeable changes between pictures taken six years ago and ones snapped in 2004 and 2005.
Both show the gullies had filled with a light-coloured deposit, which is believed to be frozen water.
Scientists believe the water emanated from deep within the planet and gradually welled up toward the surface. Once it encountered the frigid Martian air, however, it froze, forming an ice dam.
Water continued to build up underground until there was enough pressure to burst the ice cap and allow a jet of water to flow down the channels.
The amount of water is about what would be needed to fill five to 10 swimming pools, Edgett says.
The findings will be followed up by a new higher-resolution camera aboard NASA's Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter, which began its mission last month.
The Global Surveyor team also found new impact craters, raising the prospect that meteorite hits are a concern as NASA begins to think about sending human explorers to Mars.
