
In some parts of the world, it really is a man's world. Researchers say sex selection in societies that favour boys mean there are at least 80 million missing females
A preference for male babies and a resulting sex-ratio imbalance could lead to a destabilised society, researchers warn.
Their study in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences says the imbalance would leave more men unmarried, raising the risks of antisocial and violent behaviour.
The researchers say that parts of China and India would have 12-15% more men over the next 20 years, many of them in rural areas and with a limited education.
"The growing number of young men with a lack of family prospects will have little outlet for sexual energy," write Dr Zhu Wei Xing of China's Zhejian Normal University and Dr Therese Hesketh of the Institute of Child Health at University College London. 
"This trend would lead to increased levels of antisocial behaviour and violence, as gender is a well-established correlate of crime, and especially violent crime," they say, adding the trend would threaten stability and security in many societies.
Sex ratios are already distorted in large parts of Asia and North Africa, and sex-selective abortion and discrimination in healthcare for girls have led to higher female mortality. 
"There are now an estimated 80 million missing females in India and China alone," the researchers write. 
China introduced a one-child policy in 1979 to control population growth, but it has led to a rise in the male-to-female ratio from 1.11:1 in 1980-89 to 1.23:1 in 1996-2001, according to a study published this month in the British Medical Journal.
In 2004, 48.6% and 48.7% of the population in China and India, respectively, were female.
In contrast, females comprise 49.1% of the total population in East Asia, and 52.1% in all of Europe and Central Asia, according to figures from the World Bank. 
The authors called for measures to reduce sex selection and an urgent change in cultural attitudes, or dire consequences could follow. 
"When single young men congregate, the potential for more organised aggression is likely to increase substantially and this has worrying implications for organised crime and terrorism," they say.
