
What happens to tissue that's removed during a biopsy and stored in liquid nitrogen?
Some Australians are concerned that tissue samples held by hospitals could be used to make human clones, a survey of public attitudes towards tissue banking reveals.
Early findings from the study, by researchers from the Centre for Values, Ethics and the Law in Medicine at the University of Sydney, show some people are also opposed to biopsy tissue, such as cut-out tumours, being used as a source of stem cells or by drug companies.
Most hospitals have a collection of tissue that's been removed for diagnosis and serves as a research resource.
The tissue can be used for in-house research or passed on to other institutions and private companies.
But the laws relating to stored tissue are confusing and contradictory because of differences between state and federal jurisdictions, says Bronwen Morrell, who will present the study's interim findings at the Australian Health and Medical Research Congress in Melbourne this week.
She says her study indicates that people want laws setting down basic parameters about consent, information about the type of research and whether their tissue can be used for profit.
Morrell asked participants a range of questions including whether there was any sort of research they wouldn't want their tissue used for.
"Two things that came up repeatedly were cloning and stem cells," she says.
"Cloning came up repeatedly, which is interesting because I think they were thinking of reproductive cloning which isn't allowed in Australia anyway ... but obviously that's something that's very much on their mind."
The federal government is currently debating recommendations of the Lockhart Review to allow therapeutic cloning in Australia, but reproductive cloning remains banned.
Morrell says the study also shows some people trust the public sector more with their tissue than private companies.
"As long as research was being done in a public hospital they would feel comfortable with that," she says.
"But if it was a private company doing the research, especially drug companies, they wouldn't be that happy."
Some people also wanted any profit made out of their tissue to go back into research, she says.
Dr Wendy Lipworth, who was involved in the research, says that genetic technology has raised new issues for tissue banks.
"I think 30 or 40 years ago nobody would have thought anything of it, they would have thought why would I care, it's just the leftover bits of my tumour," she says.
"But as genetic technology has evolved you can find out more and do more with that material. There wasn't as much at stake until recently."
Recommendations
The current survey is part of a three-part study into in the ethics of tumour banking.
The first part of the study, published in the Journal of Law and Medicine this year, surveyed hospitals and private research institutions.
The second part, which questioned experts and medical professionals, is still being analysed.
The third and final part subjected 20 people including patients, parents, consumer representatives and health advocates to a in-depth one hour interview.
Morrell says researchers hope to publish a series of reports when the results are fully analysed.
The researchers may also make recommendations about the sorts of procedures that tissue banks should follow, Worrell says.
