
Could tinkering with the DNA of immune cells be a cure for deadly cancers?
Two out of 17 patients with a deadly form of skin cancer have had their tumours wiped out by genetically altered immune cells, US researchers report.
But while the findings are being hailed as evidence that the troubled field of gene therapy can successfully treat cancer, other experts say the results are disappointing.
Dr Steven Rosenberg of the US National Cancer Institute (NCI) and colleagues report their findings today online ahead of print publication in the journal Science.
The technique "represents the first time that gene manipulations have been shown to cause tumour regression in humans," Rosenberg says.
The researchers infused 17 patients suffering from metastatic melanoma with their own white blood cells that had been removed and genetically engineered to fight tumours. 
The patients' T-cells had been modified with genes that code for receptors designed to recognise melanoma cells.
The cancer was eliminated in two male patients, the researchers say. 
In one case a 52-year-old man had a tumour in his armpit disappear and another on his liver shrunk enough to be surgically removed. He remained disease-free 19 months after treatment, the study says. 
Another patient, a 30-year-old man, had a lung tumour recede and showed no signs of disease 18 months later. 
"The tumours went away and both of the patients are now completely disease-free over a year and a half later," says Rosenberg who is chief of surgery at the NCI.
Before the experiment, the patients had advanced skin cancer that was not helped by standard therapies and they were expected to live just three to six months, he says. 
Disappointing response
But the cancers in the remaining 15 patients did not respond to the treatment and other gene therapy researchers say the results may be a step forward, but are no cause for celebration.
"This certainly is a significant technical advance that is going to fuel more interest ... and more enthusiasm, I hope, among researchers," says Dr Michel Sadelain, director of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center's somatic cell engineering laboratory. 
But, he adds, it is "undeniable the response here is rather disappointing".
Professor Savio Woo of Mount Sinai School of Medicine and a past president of the American Society of Gene Therapy says the researchers "need to do it in more patients and get better response rates, and when that happens we can all pop the champagne".
Scientists have touted gene therapy as holding great promise for a range of ailments, but safety problems have set the field back. 
One experiment cured two French "bubble boys" with a rare immune disorder, but later gave them leukaemia, and an 18-year-old died in a 1999 gene therapy experiment. 
Rosenberg says there are no side effects from the melanoma gene therapy. 
It was administered with the drug interleukin-2, which can cause fluid retention, he says.
The researchers hope the same approach can fight breast, lung and other cancers and are seeking regulatory approval to test the technology in other patients.
