
Scientists say that terrestrial gamma-ray flashes could spark cloud-to-cloud lightning
The ongoing hunt for the sources of exotic gamma rays inside Earth's atmosphere has taken two strange turns. 
One is that the powerful radiation flashes are being triggered far closer to the ground than ever suspected.
The other is that in at least one case a burst of gamma rays appears to have happened before a burst of cloud-to-cloud lightning, like a lightning trigger. 
Terrestrial gamma-ray flashes are thought to occur when electrons that have been somehow sped to near light-speed slam into air molecules.
The great burst of energy the collision releases is enough to create gamma rays, one of the most powerful form of electromagnetic radiation. 
Researchers have thought they were in some way associated with sprites, the enigmatic vertical bolts of lighting that zap upward from very high cloud tops towards space.
But new US research with an array of ground-based and space-borne instruments has located the gamma-ray sources much deeper in the Earth's atmosphere, in thunderstorms. 
The finding, reported recently in the journal Geophysical Research Letters, is puzzling because the thicker air of the lower atmosphere gobbles up gamma rays pretty quickly. 
"Sprites were the logical choice [for a link with gamma-ray flashes]," says lead author Dr Mark Stanley of the Los Alamos National Laboratory. 
Not only are they flashy and energetic, they are also close to the edge of space, which would easily allow the gamma rays to escape the atmosphere and reach orbiting detectors. 
"But there's nothing there and that's quite a shock," says Stanley.
High flashes and low ones
The researchers took new measurements using the ground-based Los Alamos Sferic Array, which detects electrical changes in the atmosphere, and the gamma-ray detector onboard the orbiting Ramaty High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Imager.
Their results indicate the terrestrial gamma-ray flashes are coming from much lower down, and come from cloud-to-cloud lighting in much thicker, gamma-ray absorbing air. 
That means the exact source of the gamma rays has to be putting out a lot more gamma rays so a few can make it up into space and be detected. 
"If you detect this at any distance that means whatever causes this is incredibly violent," says Stanley.
Stanley and his colleagues have found terrestrial gamma-ray flashes that appear to come from less than 15,000 metres up, within the range of jet aircraft.
"I'm getting some even lower than that," Stanley says.
Perhaps terrestrial gamma ray flashes are created at various elevations, says lightning researcher Assistant Professor Steven Cummer of Duke University.
Those that are higher can be only detected by the orbiting imager and those that are lower can be detected only on the ground.
Which came first? The gamma rays or the lightning?
Stanley and his colleagues also refined the timing of the events and in one case found that the gamma rays detected by the orbiting imager might have preceded the lightning, which was a complete surprise, he says. 
"In every way this was unusual," says Stanley. 
Until now it had been assumed that the terrestrial gamma-ray flashes were a product of the lightning initiation process. Now it also appears possible that they could also play a role in triggering lightning. How? 
"It's really not at all that well understood," says Cummer.
Despite centuries of research to unlock the secrets of lighting, including Benjamin Franklin's discovery of its electrical nature,  Cummer says "nobody really knows what starts a lightning strike".
