
The emerging space tourism market has sparked the need to reassess what we really mean by space, a legal expert says
We need a legal definition of where space begins and ends to ensure future space tourists get what they pay for, says an Australian expert in space law.
Associate Professor Steven Freeland from the University of Western Sydney will speak about emerging issues in space law at a seminar next week.
Freeland says there are plenty of laws and treaties dealing with what we can and can't do in space. 
For example, it's illegal to claim territory in space or to use space for military or non-peaceful purposes.
But he says there's no actual legal demarcation of where space begins and the sky ends.
"The argument has always been why do we really care? Why do we really need to know?"
But he says new technology, including the prospect of a growing space tourism market, has given these questions a pressing new relevance.
"If we look at space tourism ... [people] are going to want a certificate that says 'I've been in space', not 'hey you've been very high up in the air'," he says.
"And from a commercial perspective the industry would love to be able to say 'you've been in space', because you're not going to pay US$100,000 to be very high up in the air."
What's a life worth in space?
Freeland says other space tourism issues potentially affected by whether a craft is in space or the air include insurance, liability, traffic control and rescue obligations.
Even the right to claim the term 'astronaut' may have to be revisited.
"[Some operators] say we'll all become astronauts and we'll get our astronaut wings.  But 'astronaut' is a term under space law," he says.
"Are you and I an astronaut just because we paid money to sit in this thing?"
Freeland says the existing space laws are badly in need of an overhaul because developments like space tourism were never envisioned at the time they were drafted.
"You have to have legal certainty [about] what law applies, whether it's international air law or international law of outer space or a combination of both," he says.
Who decides?
Currently decisions about matters like demarcation are made by the United Nations General Assembly on the basis of recommendations from its Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPUOS).
COPUOS takes advice from bodies like the International Institute of Space Law, of which Freeland is a member.
He says while Australia set something of a benchmark in defining space as beginning at 100 kilometres above sea level under its 1998 space activities legislation, international bodies have been slow to act.
Freeland says demarcation was at the top of the list when COPUOS first met in 1962 but "here we are and we still don't have a legal demarcation".
He says major players in the space race, like the US, have resisted moves to pin down a definition of space, largely because it could restrict their ability to carry out certain activities that would be banned or limited under space law.
