
Textiles made from feathers may be lightweight, good insulators and cushion impact
Chicken feathers and rice straw are being turned into fabric fibres that resemble wool, linen and cotton, scientists say.
The textiles may help reduce not only agricultural waste but also our reliance on petroleum-based synthetic fabrics.
"[Some] 50% of all fibres are from petroleum, and we have an oil issue," says Yiqi Yang, a professor of textile science at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, who is collaborating with doctoral candidate Narendra Reddy.
Yang and his colleagues think that agricultural waste could offer an alternative source.
Rice straw is made up of the bits and stems left over after a rice harvest and, like cotton and flax, is composed mostly of cellulose. It now accounts for about 526 million tonnes of waste worldwide.
Chicken feathers, which are composed of keratin, like wool, make up about 1.8 billion kilograms in waste each year in the US. Much of this material ends up in landfill.
According to Yang, even processing a small fraction of this agricultural waste and turning it into textiles could have a significant impact on world demand, which totals about 63 million tonnes of fibres a year.
Yang's team has already conducted research on developing fibres from rice straw.
"He's a leader in this kind of research," says Jonathan Chen, associate professor at Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge.
First, collect your rice straw
Just like cotton, the rice straw is harvested, baled, shipped to a plant and broken down into tiny pieces.
The straw is treated with a combination of chemicals, heat and enzymes, and washed repeatedly.
The process breaks down the straw, separating the cellulose fibres from other natural materials.
These materials include hemicellulose, a carbohydrate, silica, a hard mineral substance, and lignin, a polymer that hardens and strengthens plant cell walls.
The process of extracting the fibres is under patent review and so Yang is reluctant to describe it in too much detail. But he says that it is not complicated or expensive.
"The number one challenge is the cost-effectiveness for utilising these kinds of waste materials," says Chen.
"If you can compete with current available products, you will have a chance."
Fluffy feathers 
Research for processing fibres from the chicken feathers is not as advanced as the rice straw research.
So far, Yang and his team have characterised the fibre properties of feathers to determine the best applications.
They have focused on the thin, filamentous parts that form the fluffier parts of the feather. These parts have microscopic air pockets interlaced within a honeycomb architecture.
Those properties could offer fibres that are lightweight, good insulators and cushion impact.
The biggest hurdle may be getting the textile industry to accept chicken and rice fibres.
Yang expects the driving force to come from the clothing industry, where people are always looking out for durable, inexpensive, natural textiles.
